From roadside towns to greenbelt city : a general plan for south Santa

Clara County.
Santa Clara County (Calif.).

San Jose, Calif. : Santa Clara County, 1958.

ROADSIDE TOWNS

Even to one who has never been in Santa Clara County, the towns pictured here will seem familiar. They are unmistakably "Main Street, U. S.A. " In the cracker barrel era, they functioned well as the social and trade center of a slow-paced, rural community. But with a stream of today's high speed traffic coursing through them, this function is impaired.

Small main streets grow into large main streets. Their charm wanes as their size increases. The uniformity of their architecture--the parapet wall, the false front, the flush-with-the-sidewalk building line--may givea few buildings asense ofunity.  But when stamped for miles along a thoroughfare, this uniformity becomes unbearable monotony. Merchants‘ signs may give stores individuality up to a point. But when each sign tries to outdo the others in attracting attention, the result is chaos.

The worst fate that can befall a main street is to find itself merged with others of its kind in continuous roadside. More often main street becomes downtown, a place with the same faults on a larger scale. The result is "downtownitis", a malady which is attacking the heart of manya city. Here are the germs of the disease: through traffic mixed with local traffic; autos mixed with pedestrians; regimented monotony; visual anarchy; mixed land uses; lack of open space. If these germs are discernable in the South County's roadside towns, it is not too late to apply an antidote.

The treatment for "downtownitis" involves design and planning. The heartof the
city needs open space--it needs trees, grass and plants, the threads of our natural envi- ronment, woven into its fabric. It needs activity and people aplenty, but its people deserve to be secure from danger, unhurried, and surrounded by beauty. This is a goal of the greenbelt city.

Mountain streams, shaded by native alders and sycamores, suggest the rich potential for parks and recreation in much of the South County's countryside.

Whitewashed farm buildings in the hollows of rolling grasslands speak of man's struggle to wrest a living from frugal hillsides.

In the fertile flatlands, nature has rewuarded man's efforts more bountifully. Crop lands and orchards hum with activity as the summer's harvest is gathered.


THE SOUTH COUNTY'S COUNTRYSIDE

In its countryside lies the South County's real wealth. This wealth cannotalways be measured in dollars. Its streams, reservoirs and mountains have a rich recreation potential. Its 29, 000 acres of range and woodland protect its water sources and feed many head of cattle. Its 20,000 acres of orchards supply apricots, cherries, pears, prunes and walnuts to local and world markets. Another 8,000 acres of crop land grow strawberries, grapes, sugar beets, tomatoes, beans, garlic, and other foods.

This legacy can be dissipated if it is not fully appreciated and protected. Billboards and litter can ruin the area's scenery. Unwise land uses can impair the watershed. Urban sprawl infiltrating without plan into the farmlands can make farming unprofitable.

In the North Valley, 217 acres of farmland are being converted to urban use for every 1,000 new persons who move into the area. Unfortunately, much of the land being lost is alluvial soil of the best crop producing capacity. The South County's future population of 275,000 will require 60,000 acres of land. If urban growth can be directed to the area's less fertile soil, the best farmlands can be preserved as a continuing resource.

SOUTH SANTA CLARA VALLEY AS IT IS TODAY


PROBLEMS OF THE NORTH COUNTY

Interlaced and overlapping jurisdictions tangling government in a web of frustration. The price: staggering service and government costs, bitter conflicts of interest, divergent policies for development.

Subdivisions sprouting in the valley's most fertile soils.  Since 1942, 76,440 acres of the County's tillable soil have been covered by the buildings and pavements of urban development. The hit and miss pattern of this development has so hamstrung farm economy that an equal number of farms are doomed.

Urban scatteration becoming continuous urban sprawl, and finally dreary, endless megalopolis. Once separate communities threaten to be swallowed in a vast anonymity.

A monotonous sea of look-alike houses on small look-alike lots. Typical development has subjected a free people to the regimentation of a rubber stamp environment.

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE SOUTH COUNTY

One regional government serving semi-autonomous communities ofdistinct character. A central government can furnish region-wide services with maximum efficiency and minimum cost. Local initiative can be fostered by control of community affairs and adequate representation in the central government.

Preservation of the best orchards and farms by building on the slopes and least productive soils instead of fertile flat lands. The rewards: a stable economy, a close-in food supply, and the visual pleasure of green fields and trees.

Neighborhoods with avariety of dwelling types. People with individual differences and families ofvarying composition deserve a non-stereotyped environment.

Compact communities of delimited size, separated by greenbelts of agricultural lands and other open spaces.  Only by such separation can a community hope to maintain its identity.

PROBLEMS OF THE NORTH COUNTY

Criss-cross drive-to-work patterns, resulting in a snarl of conflicting traffic. Inadequate mass transit to relieve the load on automobile thoroughfares.


Streets for playgrounds. The mass subdivision has no vacant lots. Because parks were not included in the neighborhood design, there will be no common playspace when the land is fully developed.

Roads choked with strip commercial development. Shopping and through traffic have separate and conflicting requirements. Mixing the two ruins both. The resulting anarchy is seen in the honky-tonk of roadtown.

Inefficiency and duplication of effort in providing water, sewage disposal, flood control, highway, and other public facilities. The failure of "fractionated" government to solve regional problems has been extremely costly to the taxpayer.

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE SOUTH COUNTY

Simplified drive-to-work patterns made possible by centralized employment areas. Efficient and rapid mass transit, making it possible to go from home to work and back without driving.

A system of local and regional parks connected by trailways and recreation roads. Planned recreation space built in as neighborhoods develop.

Limited access trafficways free from conflicting local traffic movement and uncluttered by roadside signs.  Planned shopping centers off the main thoroughfare, with ample parking and protection for the pedestrian shopper.

Utilities carefully engineered to serve the future population in accord with the general plan. Public facilities can be planned ahead on a staged basis for the whole region, using the three stages of the General Plan as a guide.

THE GENERAL PLAN

This is a general plan for a near ideal environment in an unspoiled area of great
natural beauty. Here is the possibility for true urban-rural living: town and country
co-existing without the one destroying the other. Here is a regional city holding six
separate communities, separated by a common greenbelt of forms and orchards, parks
and parkways, and rangeland.

The plan is general. The location of land uses listed in the legend and shown as blocks of color on the map is not precise. It is not a zoning map based on exact property lines. The plan is, however, a firm statement of policy. It is a graphic statement of intention to shape future growth toward certain goals. These goals, as listed opposite, are suggested by the "Recommendations for the South Valley" illustrated on the four preceding pages.

For the year 2000 the plan sees a "greenbelt" city of some 275,000 people. These people will live in six communities, each with a distinct character of its own. Separating these communities and limiting their ultimate growth is a greenbelt which includes 35, 000 acres of agricultural land.

Gilroy and Morgan Hill are existing towns which have grown to accommodate 40,000 to 50,000 people. They are balanced communities with industry east of the railroad.  The present town of San Martin has become a major central industrial area of the region, separated by the railroad from a residential area for 15, 000 to 20,000 people.

Three new communities now accommodate 40,000 to 50,000 people each. Uvas,
northwest of Gilroy, lies in the pleasant valley of the creek of that name (Spanish
for grapes). Vista Verde, east of Gilroy, lies along the foothills overlooking the
green valley. Further east, in the intermountain valley from which it takes its name,
is the new town of Canada de los Osos (Canyon of the Bears).

Between Gilroy and San Martin is the civic and cultural center for the new "greenbelt"
city. City and County offices, a junior college or university, a park, and a regional
shopping center are included here.

Cﬁriginal from
UNI‘; EFT-IT 1' NF ."."1'1 H|'5¥ H


Early stages of the plan are depicted on the following four pages. lt is important in
worltlng toward the plan that the sequence of growth suggested in these stages be followed.

HOW TO MAKE THE PLAN A REALITY

The following tools and procedures are helpful and necessary in shaping our future environment according to a plan:

Adoption of the Plan. When, after public hearings, the Planning Commissions and legislative
bodies adopt the plan, it has official status as the firm policy of the body politic. The
interest of every citizen is critical at this stage.

Zoning Ordinance. Zoning regulations control the use ofland in accordance with the plan.
Initially, the zoning should be based on the first stage of the General Plan. A time passes,
zoning should be expanded to relate to later stages. County ordinances now in effect need
revision to accommodate some of the key ideas in the plan.

Subdivision Ordinance. This ordinance controls division of land for residential and other
use. Present regulations enforce high standards of street and drainage improvements, but
make no provision for parks or schools. Flexibility to permit imaginative neighborhood
design is needed in subdivision control.

Official Plan Lines Ordinance. This ordinance controls building set-backs along thorough-fares identified in the General Plan. This protection of future rights-of-way prevents
construction of improvements which would interfere with future road location.

Capital Improvements. Public works, financed and built in stages according to the General
Plan, help to shape the community and the region.

Redevelopment. Where existing development is counter to the ultimate plan, renewal and
redevelopment offera means of reclaiming substandard areas and rebuilding nearer to modern
needs.

Detailed Community Plans. Planning should not stop with the adoption of a General Plan
for the Greenbelt City. Each community in the South Valley Region deserves a detailed
plan which includes circulation, neighborhood design, location and site plans for parks,
government buildings, and other community facilities.

EARLY STAGES OF THE PLAN

For 1970 the plan sees no very radical change from the valley as it is today. Existing communities have grown in a compact and orderly way. The new community of Uvas has arisen in the western foothills. The Regional Center has been started.

Population for the South Valley is now 65,000, a growth of over 40,000 in 13 years. Gilroy has 25,000 people; Morgan Hill, 20,000; San Martin, 8,000; and Uvas, 8,500.

Residential areas are limited to the western side of the tracks in the existing towns. Old residential areas east of the tracks are gradually being transformed for industrial uses.

Industry is localized east of the tracks in Gilroy and Morgan Hill. The new central industrial area has begun to take shape at San Martin.

Commercial areas have become planned shopping districts in preference to roadside strips.

Agriculture remains the predominant land use, giving the valley its essentially rural character.

Circulation has improved with the construction of new freeways along the east side of the valley and over Pacheco Pass. An expressway bypassing the centers of Morgan Hill and Gilroy has been built. Several other maior roads have been improved or constructed.

Public facilities have been built: The first government offices, and parks.
EARLY STAGES OF THE PLAN STAGE II

By 1985 the change from roadside towns to greenbelt city is fairly complete. Existing communities have filled out and are nearing their ultimate size. Two new foothill communities, Uvas and Vista Verde, are well established. Orchards and farms remain as a bulwark of the region's economy and as common open space between communities.  

Population has reached 180,000, with 7,500 new people arriving in the Valley yearly. Gilroy and Morgan Hill have 45,000 people; San Martin, 15,000; Uvas 30,000; and Vista Verde, 17,000.

Residential areas will have spread out over some of the least productive soils, but are still compactly centered around community cores.

Industry has expanded in the three locations identified in Stage I.

Commercial activity has increased in relation to growth. A large shopping center has been built in the Regional Center.

Agriculture has been under some pressure from the competition of urban development. State and federal economic aids and a firm local policy have accounted for the survival of the large block of farmland shown in the plan.

Public facilities include the beginning of a new Junior College with its sport
and cultural facilities.  A joint city-eounty civic center adioins the campus.
A park along Carnadero Creek offers boating and other recreation activities. El
Toro peak west of Morgan Hill has become a park offering sweeping overlooks of the valley.

Circulation includes a mass transit system for quick movement to and from work. 
Even without cowboys and Indians, the South County has an "out west" quality. It is a land of wide open spaces, distant vistas, sharp contrasts of light and shade, mountain and plain. The plan proposes to fit human beings and the facilities they require into this picture without disruption of this "open space" quality. To achieve this purpose, the greenbelt city design should provide a "flow of space" from dwelling unit--to neighborhood--to community--to farmlands--and, finally, to the distant open space of the valley's mountain rim. Examples of such design are suggested here.

This is a greenbelt neighborhood. A group of such neighborhoods might comprise one of the new foothill communities shown in the plan. The school, and a neighborhood park are centrally grouped as a greenbelt of public open space. Easily accessible to the whole neighborhood by pedestrian walkways, the common green fosters a social cohesion often lacking in the ordinary subdivision. "Multiples" mixed with "singles" offer housing to a variety of family types. An agricultural greenbelt adjoins the neighborhood and separates it from the next community.
DESIGN FOR OPEN SPACE IN THE GREENBELT CITY

The Regional Center can be a focal point For edﬁcational, cultural, and recreational opportunities, as well as a forum for local government. The wooded stream and generous open space give the center on informal, rural quality characteristic of the region.
THE SOUTH VALLEY AND 

It is our hope
that the objectives of the
South County Plan
may be extended beyond the
planning area boundaries
into the entire county
and the Central Coast Region.

Santa Clara County is a
garden spot which has attracted
many thousands of people.
The County's mild climate,
its bountiful orchards,
its scenic mountain setting,
have made it, up to now,
a most desirable place to live.
For this reason and others,
we can expect that by i985
nearly two million people will live here.

Unplanned development of the
urban facilities to serve this
population could mean the death knell
of the amenities which brought
most of us to this county.

It is the obiective of the
Preliminary General Plan to preserve
these values. In the plan,
agricultural greenbelts,
along with parks and parkways,
serve to separate and identify communities
and to bring open space
into all parts of the metropolitan area.
Mountain parks and watershed reserves provide
a near-by resource of semi-wilderness
/_/_/___ ,,

Origin al f r-::: m

|,|H|'.'EF".7|T 1‘  ‘ ‘

THE SOUTH COUNTY IN ITS REGIONAL CONTEXT

The year 1985 will probably see over nine million people living in the Central Coast Region. As intensive urban growth rings San Francisco Bay and swells out beyond the fringes of existing communities, open space will become more and morea resource to be cherished. The future land use pattern shown here suggests that by the conservation of agricultural and watershed lands, and by the development of an integrated regional park system, there can still be generous open spaces available to the people who will live here in I985.

The southern portion of the region, including the South Santa Clara County, San Benito County, the Salinas Valley, and the Monterey Bay area will have a population of nearly one million.  This area, if developed in accordance with the principles of the South County Plan, could be a prototype of a new planned Metropolitan Area, where each community is an identifiable entity, separated from its neighbors by open space and low intensity development. A maior focus of this area will be the port of Moss Landing.

In the years to come, South Santa Clara County will be, even more than now, a crossroads for many regional activities. More food products will flow into and through it from the San Joaquin Valley, because of increased irrigation from the Feather River Aqueduct, and completion of the West San Joaquin Freeway. Tourists bound for the beaches and scenic attractions of Santa Cruz and Monterey Counties will pass through the South County in increasing numbers from the Bay Area and the Central Valley. A new freeway will connect Gilroy and Hollister as way points along a maior automobile route between San Francisco and Los Angeles. Regional parks and parkways, as well as freeways, will link the various parts of the Central Coast Area.

The patterns for future living, working, and recreation spaces are set in the day-to-daydecisions affecting development. Consistent regional policy is needed to guide these decisions toward a well ordered environment.
G E N E RAL PLAN 3 E R | ES County 0/ Santa Clara Planning Department

 

From Roadside Towns to Greenbelt City

A GENERAL PLAN for SOUTH SANTA CLARA COUNTY

from roadside towns to greenbelt city

A GENERAL PLAN FOR SOUTH SANTA CLARA COUNTY

county of santa clara planning commission
civic center, san jose, california, march 1958


Until now, the landscape of Santa Clara County's South Valley has been only lightly touched by the hand of man. Orchards have been planted on the grassy plain which the first Spaniards saw in l770.  Along the trail they travelled, roadside towns have sprung up.  But the man-made geometry of its orchards . . even the clutter of its roadside commerce . .  has left the area's natural beauty essentially unspoiled.  The narrow valley's close-set mountain borders give it a deceptive feeling of isolation. It seems to be a landlocked Shangri—la secure from invasion.

Yet, beyond the gap of Coyote Narrows, in the wider North Valley, there sprawls one of the nation's fastest growing and most disorderly metropolitan agglomerations.  Explosive growth has brought to the North Valley problems to tax the best of man's planning efforts. For these 20th Century problems there has been a dependence on a horse and buggy system of government. Among other things, too many jurisdictions have spoiled the broth of pleasant living in the North Valley.

Here then is a challenge to planning and to democratic self government. Can the South County learn from the mistakes of other areas? Can it absorb the inevitable population growth of the coming years and still keep its charm?

Here is a plan which has that objective.

Making this plan reality depends on the will of the people.

THE SOUTH COUNTY'S

Coyote. A truck stop serving the passing motorist. Twelve miles south of downtown San Jose. Unincorporated.

Madrone. Half a roadside town, since the Southern Pacific tracks crowd in upon the highway here. Truckers‘ eateries and like es- tablishments line one side of the road. Six miles south of Coyote. Annexation to Morgan Hill in progress.

Morgan Hill. A town of 2, 000, picturesquely nestled at the foot of El Toro, or "Murphy's Peak. " People assume that this peak is "Morgan Hill." Actually, the town was named after a Mr. Hill. A mattress Factory, a signal flare plant, a poultry processing plant, and a wholesale nursery employing 500 people. Two miles south of Madrone. Incorporated, l906.

San Martin. Named after achapel built by Martin Murphy, Sr., an early settler in the area. Has a small residential district and sev- eral thriving food processing plants: pickles, wine, health foods, strawberries. Four miles south of Morgan Hill. Unincorporated .

Gilroy. Named for the Scotsman, John Gilroy, who iumped ship in Monterey and came to the area in l8l4. The County's second largestcity in l869, Gilroy today has settled into ninth place with 6,000 people. Its canneries and other plants employ 2, 800 workers in the peak summer months. Six miles south of San Martin. Incorporated, l868.

