RESOLUTION OF THE CITY PLANNING COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF SAN JOSE, CALIFORNIA, APPROVING AND ADOPTING A MASTER PLAN FOR SAID CITY 

BE IT RESOLVED by the Planning Commission of the City of San Jose, as follows:

WHEREAS, the City Planning Department and the City Planning Commission have prepared a Master Plan for the City of San Jose, California, including land use elements, circulation elements, standards of population density and building intensity for various districts and areas, school elements, recreation elements, transportation elements, public services and public facility elements, elements relating to beautification and aesthetic values, all as set forth in that certain document consisting of text, maps and charts entitled, "Master Plan of the City of San Jose, California, January 1958;" and

WHEREAS, the City Planning Commission has heretofore on 4 March, 1958 and 18 March 1958 held two public hearings on consideration of said Master Plan, notices of which were given in the manner and the times required by law; NOW, THEREFORE, Be it Resolved as follows:

1. That that certain document entitled, "Master Plan of the City of San Jose, California, January, 1958,"

reclaimed water would be completely satisfactory for irrigation purposes and merits serious consideration.

The people of the Valley and their governmental agencies are well aware of the problem of obtaining an adequate water supply. Their actions of the past 30 years and their present intentions indicate that the possibilities of having sufficient water by l965 are excellent.  

Water Control: Water, a problem to the entire valley because of its scarcity, becomes a life-and-death matter to some when winter rains cause streams to overflow. The depletion of the underground water supply has had a direct effect on the seriousness of the Valley's flood problems. Floods, their causes and remedies, are of concern to planners who must approve subdivision and land use plans, lay out major thoroughfares and other facilities.

The stream system of most concern to San Jose consists of Coyote Creek and the Guadalupe River. Coyote Creek originates in the Diablo Range and flows through the eastern part of San Jose. The Guadalupe River, fed by its tributary creeks, which rise in Loma Prieta area of the Santa Cruz Mountains, flows through the western part of San Jose.

THE PEOPLE

A most important change in the distribution of the nation's urban and rural population has been occurring since 1920, a year which marked the beginning of great improvements in routes and means of communication. Actually this change can be termed a phenomenon in that people have been moving from other states in this country to California.  Furthermore, there has also been a movement within the State of Calitornia itself. The San Jose area is the focal point of the movement both from outside the state and from within the state. It is estimated that growth by migration is approximately four times growth by natural sources.

Oi interest is the tact that the San Jose Metropolitan Area has been drawing very high proportions of migrants who are college graduates. Other metropolitan areas of the state are not as fortunate in the educational status of their new citizens.

It is to be expected that, with an exceptional climate, space and a beautiful area within which to grow, educational advantages, and a good employment potential, the San Jose area would experience tremendous growth.

CREATIVE RESOURCES

Man's activities in providing for the many necessary facilities which our present-day civilization requires while supplementing the many resources which are inherited from God and from nature are an asset only if they are orderly and well-planned. The City of San Jose instituted City Planning by virtue of the provisions of a Charter which was adopted in 1916. However, it was not until almost a decade later that San Jose started to develop interest in a far-reaching transportation and major thoroughfare plan. This was adopted in 1927 and became the basis for the relocation of the Southern Pacific Company's transportation system through San Jose. It was also the start of plans for developing, extending and widening its pattern of streets and thoroughfares. In 1928, intensive work was developed which resulted in the adoption of the City's first comprehensive zoning ordinance. This set of regulations emboding use, area and height provisions, became law on the 1st of July 1929. In 1931, a Civic Center Plan was adopted and was the basis for a bond issue a year later from which the San Jose Municipal Auditorium was built. From then until World War II and since the close of World War II, many elements of a city plan have been adopted,
all of which require considerable tabulations here. It is sufficient to note that the many projects having to do with transportation, local transit, major thoroughfares, subdivisions, general land use and zoning, school sites, recreation facilities, public buildings and street trees have all been made part of a pattern which is making San Jose an outstanding city.  

In growing from a city of 5.47 square miles to one of 40 square miles and from a handful of people to its present population of approximately l45,000 people, many millions of dollars for streets, sewers, drainage facilities, utilities, public and private buildings of all types have been spent. The measure or achievement, even more than in the amount of effort and money spent, is in the manner in which these many projects have been located in order that they may give long-lasting satisfaction not only to the present population of the City of San Jose, but also to the next several generations. While it has been said ' we can only project the that "a city is for all time,‘ life of many of these creative sources into the future as far and as intelligently as we can forsee. Naturally, the more logically they are located, the more soundly
they are built and the more conscious we have been in the preservation and creation of space and beauty, the longer and better these facilities will serve our geople.
THE PLAN FOR CIRCULATION

A business man will soon be able to fly the 3,000 miles from New York City to the San Francisco International Airport in about 3 hours. However, in order to complete his journey from the airport into either San Francisco or the San Jose area may require an additional hour or more. Within the traffic congested centers of today's cities, it may take an hour or more for an auto trip that in 1900 required 10 minutes by horse and buggy. This predicament, in which modern metropolitan comunities find themselves in regard to the movement of goods and people, is a most frustrating one.

In the days of the horse-drawn street car, the extent of a city was only 2 or 2 1/2 miles in radius. The electric street car expanded the city limits to about a 15-mile radius. Automobiles then stretched the limits to about a 15-mile radius. The effects of these improvements in transportation facilities and the levels of prosperity, technological advance population increases, and migration of people to metropolitan centers have all exceeded estimates of forecasters. Thus, street and transportation systems which were planned on supposedly
long-range studies have been declared inadequate early in their lives.

The Planning Commission and Traffic Engineers of this metropolitan area face a most challenging task in their attempt to make easier the movement of goods and people. In most cases they must start with a pattern of streets and highways that disregard topography, are too narrow, and are patterned for convenience in subdivisions. Upon this obsolete network must be superimposed a system of freeways, major throughways and local-service streets that can best be coordinated with the railway, waterway, airway and rapid-transit facilities that also carry goods and people.

San Jose's location places it in a strategic position in regard to area transportation networks. Major freeways connect the city to communities on both sides of the Bay as well as to cities south and west of San Jose. Two railroads carry passenger and freight through the city and an airport of ever-increasing importance serves the metropolitan area. Future development of the South Bay may make cheap water transportation available to the area's industry.

Although all the means of circulation are matters of concern for the City Planning Commission, it must of 
a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part hereof, be and the same is hereby adopted by this Commission as the Master Plan for the City of San Jose, California.

2. That the President of the City Planning Commission and its Director-Secretary be hereby directed to cause their signatures to be affixed and recorded on said Master Plan for San Jose, California.  

3. That a copy of said Master Plan for San Jose, California, be certified to the City Council of the City of San Jose.

PASSED AND ADOPTED by the affirmative votes of not less than two-thirds of the total voting members of the City Planning Comission of the City of San Jose, California at a regular meeting of said Commission held on 18 March, 1958, by the following called vote:

Ayes: Commissioners - Appleton, Butcher, Caputo, Mise, Santana

Noes: Commissioners - None

Absent: Commissioners - None
necessity devote a major portion of its time to matters relating to streets and highways. This is largely because of the people's gradual desertion of other means of transportation in favor of the automobile. The sheer number of vehicles involved and the demands of their owners for facilities designed to the auto's characteristics pose a tremendous problem.

The location of the inter-regional freeways is of special concern to San Jose and its residents in a number of ways. A freeway and its interchanges will block and cross existing streets and thus affect street services of different areas. Location will affect both existing and.proposed subdivisions, industrial areas and business districts.

In order to make the transportation network of the San Jose area as effective as possible, the planning agencies of the city, assisted by the studies and recommendations of traffic engineers, have endeavored to so locate routes, structures and parking areas that they will best coordinate the services of mass transit facilities.  

In striving for the design which will provide the most efficient circulation of the community's people
‘Ill-lIl.|.hfllI.-llhlluh

and goods, many inter-related factors have been considered.  Among these are such things as the destinations of people on their many journeys, their preferences as to types of transportation, available funds, available land for parking, and the effects of such innovations as the hauling of truck-trailers on barges and flatcars. All these and many more are related to San Jose's circulation problems.

At present an effort is being made to coordinate standards for widths, degree of access of frontage development along roads that interconnect the numerous communities of Santa Clara County. This is important in that it will subject the highway system to a comprehensive analysis on a functional basis and will help in starting a county-wide improvement program. As an important step towards this goal, there is now underway an engineering survey of the county's highway system. The firm of De Leuw, Cather & Company, has been employed for this study and analysis by the joint financial participation of the California State Division of Highways, Santa Clara County and the various cities of the County.

The City Planning Commission and its staff have been very active in cooperating with engineers for District IV (State Division of Highways) in planning routes for the
Bayshore Freeway, Route 5 Freeway, the Junipero Serra Freeway and its Interstate link with Route 5. They have been most active in helping solve problems relating to crossings of these freeways with important local arterials, interchanges, river crossings and other specific problems.  In summary, the plan for circulation of a metropolitan area such as San Jose's demands that consideration be given to Transportation (railway, rapid transit, highways, airways, waterways), Transit (buses, subways, taxicabs) and Traffic (major streets, secondary streets, parkways, parking, plan lines, traffic patterns). These three components of the circulation system are discussed in the following chapters.
   


TRANSPORTATION

San Jose has available -- either existent or potential -- five methods of moving people and goods into and out of the city over distances longer than those considered within the convenient commuter range.

At present, this movement of people and goods over relatively long distances is effected by means of railways, highways and airways. Consideration is currently being given to the future development of rapid transit and waterways.

Railways and highways are carrying the major portion of the traffic. Since World War II, airways have been assuming an ever-increasing role in satisfying the metropolitan area's transportation needs. Water transportation via the Bay, so important during the gold-rush era, is practically non-existent today; development of the lower Bay, however, could again make freight transportation by water an important factor in the area's economy. A plan now being considered may provide rapid transit service to Bay Area points within the next twenty years.

Since the San Jose Metropolitan Area covers approximately 270 square miles (six times the area of the City and County of San Francisco), its transportation needs

are becoming sufficiently extensive and complex that the Planning Commission is thinking in terms of rapid transit facilities within this area itself. The city's well-planned pattern of freeways and highways make this very logical when thinking in terms of movement to and from the central core of the district and from one community to another.  Consequently, mass transportation within the metropolitan district should be explored completely.

Each of these methods serves specific needs of the region's residents, business and industry. Railways carry the major portion of the freight into and out of the city, and provide the means whereby commuters can get to the heart of San Francisco in the shortest time. Buses and trucks utilize the area's freeways and thoroughfares to carry passengers and freight to comunities that may or may not be served by the railroads. Airways enable a business man to keep an 11 A.M. appointment in Los Angeles and return in time to enjoy his evening meal with his family. The planners of the city concern themselves with detail concerning each method, some of which is presented in this chapter.

Railways: San Jose is served by the Southern Pacific Railroad and the Western Pacific Railroad, both of which

have played major parts in the economic development of the area. Only the Southern Pacific provides transportation for passengers in the form of high speed commuter's service to San Francisco and long-distance service to north and south.

Both railroads have been active in the development of industrial areas to which they furnish exclusive service. Close cooperation between the San Jose Chamber of Commerce, the Administration of the City of San Jose, and the railroads, have resulted in the selection of this area for the site of many desirable industries. Examples of these developments are the Western Pacific industrial area in Milpitas where the Ford Plant is located and the Southern Pacific industrial area near Sunnyvale which is the site of the proposed General Motors plant.

The railroads and their activities have been of importance to the planners of San Jose for a number of reasons. Among these are the effect of railway develop- ment on land use, the railroad's influence on the economic welfare of the community and their effect on circulation within the city.

Location of railways has historically furnished the base upon which communities of the Western United

States have been located and oriented. In general, the central business district of a city developed about the railroad station. As the major means of transporting heavy goods, the railroads have been the base for the development of industrial areas. In this way, the railroads have played a major role in the development of land uses in San Jose. The plans of railroads for purchase and development of additional industrial areas can affect the direction of growth of the entire community.

San Jose is vitally concerned with rail-street crossings at grade both because of safety and obstruction to the flow of traffic in and about the city. The elimination of a number of such crossings is included in the long-range plans of the city. Plans are already being developed for the Hedding Street, Guadalupe Parkway, Coleman Avenue, Southwest Arterial and Almaden Road crossings with the Southern Pacific Company's rail facilities and the Southwest Arterial, Almaden Road and Story Road crossings with the Western Pacific Railroad Company's tracks.

Technological advances in facilities and innovations in service have enabled the railroads to meet the

competition of other transportation methods. The almost universal use of diesel oil as a fuel has made the railway service a cleaner, quieter and faster means of transportation. Piggy-back hauling of truck-trailers on flat-cars on long-distant runs has proven to be profitable and promises to relieve the State highways of some of their heavy truck traffic.

Highways: The movement of people and goods into and out of San Jose by means of highway transportation is a major element of the area transportation system. Although the bulk of the freight is still carried by railroads, the trucking concerns have made definite inroads into the railroad business. Bus transportation, because of its ability to reach newly settled areas and its more frequent service, has also taken a considerable share of the railroad's passenger traffic.

Truck transportation is of vital concern to the citizens of San-Jose because of its service to industry, its needs for terminal facilities, and its use of the city's major and minor streets. Much of the light-industrial area is served only by trucks and access to such areas from the company's city terminus and freeways is over residential
CITY COUNCIL
Of the City of San Jose, California

Robert C. Doerr, Mayor
Emery Delmas
Parker L. Hathaway
Paul Moore
Louis S. Solari
George Starbird
Fred Watson

A. P. Hamann, City Manager

CITY PLANNING COMISSION
Of the City of San Jose, California

Roy M. Butcher, President
Lawrence A. Appleton
Daniel J. Caputo
John S. Mise
Frank M. Santana

CITY PLANNING DEPARTMNT
Of the City of San Jose, California

Michael H. Antonacci, Director of Planning
Edward A. Williams, Asst. Director of Planning
Alfred V. Mainero, Associate Planner
Stanley 2. Twardus, Associate Planner
Norman Gunderson, Associate Planner
William E. Rodgers, Pub. Adm. Spec. Grade II
Donald A. Cotton, Junior Planner (on military leave)
Hal J. Giblin, Junior Planner
Robert M. Carlson, Junior Planner
Cecil L. Cowden, Junior Planner
Cedric E. Phelps, Engineering Aide
Madeline V. Mestice, Steno Clerk III
Norvelle R. Tranchina, Steno Clerk II
and business area streets.

To provide adequately for the needs of truck transportation and to take advantage of the motor trucks‘ inherent flexibility of movement, the Planning Commission is giving much thought to providing adequate freeway interchanges so that trucks may reach their city destination with a minimum use of city streets. Truck terminals are being located so that they are most accessible to industrial areas and to routes in and out of the city.

The inter-city transportation of passengers by bus lines is a major importance to the residents of the area who must commute between cities which may or may not be served by rail lines. A large volume of long-distance passenger traffic is carried to points north and south by bus lines which serve this area. Excellent high-speed non-stop bus service is available between San Jose and San Francisco; buses which leave about every hour during the day make the trip in about one hour and fifteen minutes.

Bus terminals at present are located in the center of the city's business district. Desirable future development may include the establishment of secondary terminals near the city's outskirts where space for parking of

commuters‘ autos is more readily available.

Airways: The San Jose Municipal Airport, because of its potential as a major airport has been one of the important factors in attracting new industry and commerce to Santa Clara County. It is one of several municipal investments which has operated at a profit.

The growing importance of this airport to San Jose may be judged by a comparison of figures for 1954 when there were 10,242 airline passengers, 50,000 takeoffs and landings, and 63 planes based at the airport. In 1956, only two years later, comparable figures were 33,005 passen- gers, 102,000 takeoffs and landings and 100 based planes.  Airport revenue increased from $75,748 in 1954 to $148,497 in 1956.

A current airport improvement program calls for the acquisition of additional land, the removal of obstructions, flight area improvement, the construction of a new admin- istration building, additional service roads, and the development of an industrial area for lease to aircraft-related industries. The expanded airport will play a big role in attracting more industrial and commercial investment to the city.

Air transport is an integral part of the transportation

tion of the city for both passengers and cargo and is a component part of the city plan. Of possible importance in the planning of the city's future transportation connections with surrounding communities will be the in- creasing reliance on helicopters for short flights. Heliport sites are being planned and can be obtained at reasonable prices now in outlying communities.

Waterways: During the early 1800's, prior to the coming of the railroads and the improvement of the roads, barges plying between Alviso and San Francisco furnished the only means of transportating the hides, tallow and grain of agricultural San Jose to market. When heavy rains made the roads impassable, water transport was again the only means of passenger travel between the two cities. The railroad's completion in 1863 doomed the water transportation companies that operated in these early years.

There has always been some enthusiasm for the development of Alviso as a port which would be capable of handling vessels of intermediate size. The existence of deep water shipping facilities would make the area more attractive to industries and shippers. Prospects for development of port facilities are again being considered. Ultimately, this
will result in the development of another major source of transportation. Water-borne transportation has always been within easy reach of the City of San Jose.

Rapid Transit: The transportation network of the Bay Area would be measurably improved if, in addition to the development of cheap water transportation for goods, a means of providing fast, economical transportation for large numbers of people could be provided. Rapid transit -- a mass transportation system distinguished from other transit by its operation at high average speeds over exclusive, grade-separated rights-of-way -- is possibly nearer to achievement than the water transportation.  

Recomendations of the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit Commission of 1956 envision an arterial system that will connect each of the population centers at its heart and that will enable the commuter to travel from San Jose to San Francisco in about one hour. The Transit Commission and its supporters believe that, if the aggravating problems of today are projected to fifteen years hence when the area's population will be 50% higher, the only reasonable approach to this staggering problem would be a rapid transit system.

Criticism has been directed at the costs, methods
of financing, and legal provisions for acquisition of rights-of-way as detailed in the Transit Commission's proposal. Preliminary estimates place the annual costs of the system at approximately $40,000,000.  

The potential of rapid transit should be most seriously considered. Between 24,000 and 40,000 passengers can be moved each hour in each lane by rapid transit whereas only 2,500 to 5,000 automobile passengers can be provided for on each lane of freeway.

Supporters of a rapid transit system claim that the estimated cost of such a system would be less than the probable cost of a freeway system to carry the same traffic loads.

HOWEVER, AS HAS ALREADY BEEN MENTIONED, A RADIAL AND CIRCUMFERENTIAL SYSTEM OF FREEWAYS AND THOROUGHFARES FOR THE ENTIRE SAN JOSE METROPOLITAN AREA MAY BE OF GREATER VALUE AND SIGNIFICANCE THAN PARTICIPATING IN A RAPID TRANSIT SYSTEM WHICH CAN SERVE ONLY TO SHORTEN THE DISTANCE BETWEEN THE SAN JOSE URBAN CENTER AND SAN FRANCISCO BY A FEW MINUTES AT BEST.

D"3‘-“"*"3’“' "3" C"m8'C UNIVE(F:§J;i|%i¥?(Eii)|Ffl:u:)IrCnH|GAN

w_moomloquwwmsnmmwuum\m._o.um:b__tmc.>>>>2<\_3E \ _uwN_u_m_v.w_mooO .:_m.Eon_ u__o_:n_
mmﬁmmamoﬂommdEERONE:.m_EE._u£Et; \ ._._>_D cam Hm-mo-mSN co ?ﬁ_m._m>_:3 E3539 ._w_qqwI >>w.__uc< commfﬂ US$950

TRANSIT

A paradox of the circulation system of a modern city is that the automobile--the least efficient of the machines available for transit -- each year assumes a larger role in the movement of people within the city. Attention, therefore, has been given to plans for the improvement of routes for automobiles in the hope that traffic congestion may be eased. These efforts are often rewarded by new problems of congestion as erstwhile patrons of mass transit begin driving their autos on the newly improved streets and highways.  

A bus of the largest type can carry as many people as 64 automobiles. Therefore, good bus service can be a factor in reducing congestion on downtown streets during rush hours.  One lane of a freeway will carry between 2,500 and 5,000 auto passengers per hour, but, if the equivalent of this traffic lane is reserved for bus use, the capacity is between 7,500 and 9,000 passengers per hour. If the bus line is in turn replaced by a street car -— noisy as it is -- the capacity rises to between 11,000 and 16,000 passengers per lane. Rapid transit, traveling over its exclusive right-of-way, may have a capacity of between 24,000 and 40,000 passengers per hour.
Despite figures such as these and additional ones that indicate the economy to the individual of mass transit, the people's increasing reliance on the automobile as a substitute for transit continues to increase.  Statistics show that patronage of both local and inter-urban mass transportation has been declining during a period of rapid p'oulation growth. With increased opera- tion costs and resulting deficits, the companies have been compelled to increase fares and reduce service, thus reducing patronage still further.  

Efforts are continually being made by those responsible for planning in San Jose to propose changes and improvements in the service of the present transit facilities that will enhance their value to the public and thereby result in increased business for the companies and a lessening of congestion on the streets. Some suggestions for innovations and improvements in transit service by buses, intra-city rapid transit, and taxi-cabs follow.

Bus Transit: The buses presently used in San Jose's transit system are the fifth in line of succession of the types that have carried the city's residents along streets such as the tree-line Alameda. Horse-drawn street cars replaced the stages in 1871, and were in turn
replaced in 1888 by a poorly-designed electric car system that was served from an underground power tunnel. When this system failed, horse-drawn cars were again called into service, to be finally replaced in 1890 by an electric-car line that was powered from overhead trolleys.

Of interest to present-day proponents of transit is the crisis which faced the local transit companies in the late 1880's and early 1890's. A sudden bicycle mania struck San Jose. Many deserted the route-bound cars in favor of the more individual means of travel. Cars which had been aver- aging $35.00 daily in fares suddenly dropped to $3.50. The financial situation of the transit companies of that day was apparently similar to the situations that present-day transit companies are experiencing in the face of passenger losses to today's vehicle of convenience.

Street cars were finally replaced by buses, the last street car journey being made in April of 1938. The City thus saw the replacement of a system that was noisy and restricted in route-flexibility by buses which are quiet and more flexible in terms of routes.

At the present time the city's bus service is provided by the San Jose City Bus Lines, Inc., a subsidiary of a nation-wide bus transit company. The local company's
RECREATION COMMISSION
Of the City of San Jose, California

Charles A. Fernish, M.D., Chairman
Dr. George Downing
Harold J. Flannery
Cecil M. George
Mrs. Peter Hansen
Bunny Lindsay
Mrs. Henry McCormick
Frank M. Bramhall, Superintendent of Recreation

BOARD OF LIBARY TRUSTEES
Of the City of San Jose, California

Henry G. Hill, Chairman
Frank J. Reidy
Aaron Richards
Thomas W. Snell
Mrs. Marlitt Stark
Mrs. Geraldine Nurney, Librarian

URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY
Of the City of San Jose, California

Roy M. Butcher, Chairman
Alden Campen
Hollis Logue
Paul Marchese
Frank C. Mitchell
Olney Smith, Executive Director

SAN JOSE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT
Board of Education

Fred W. Hilton, President
Lawrence A. Appleton
Mrs. Gertrude J. Gale
Harvey C. Miller
Earl A. Moorhead
Dr. Earl Crandall, Superintendent of Schools
experience in regards to declining patronage parallels that of its sister companies. It has not yet, however, failed to make a profit although it may do so soon, judging by the following figures:

Year Total Passengers
1951 10,333,192
1952 9,350,417
1953 9,117,893
1954 8,430,064
1955 7,855,355
1956 7,799,901
1957 7,631,892

Ideally, the transit system should transport persons at reasonably fast speeds at reasonable rates and at frequent intervals from readily available bus stops.  There are reasons why it falls short of performing this function and there are ways that the community might assist the transit companies to improve their service.  

Reasons for its inability to give the best service to its patrons are:

1. During rush hours, transit vehicles are slowed to a crawl when they must compete with automobiles for street space. Trips that used to require 20 minutes now take 30 or more minutes, 

2. Its around the clock operation is inefficient because patronage is at high peaks during rush
hours. Vehicles needed to provide this peak service are idle much of the remainder of the day. Normally, half of the company's vehicles are awaiting the rush-hour need. Because of increased operating costs and decreased patronage, fares must be raised to enable companies to exist.  This, of course, results in additional loss of patronage.

Ways by which the community might assist the bus company to improve its service are:

1. By staggering the hours of beginning and ending the work day wherever feasible. This would require the cooperation of both business firms and employees. This would enable the bus company to provide better utilization of their equipment, provide more frequent service for casual patrons, and make higher average speeds possible because of lessened traffic congestion.

2. Establish rush-hour, non=stop express runs that would operate between the center of the business district and municipally owned parked lots on the city's fringe areas.
3. Provide special shuttle service for institutions, such as San Jose State, which will soon have 15,000 students. This service will enable a patron to disembark rrom either an express or regular bus and catch a shuttle bus traveling on a 10-minute schedule and encircling the campus.  To further alleviate the parking problem in the college area, a bus could travel at half-hour intervals between the campus and the parking areas near Spartan Stadium.

4. Change existing regulations so as to permit the company to run new routes, or extensions of old ones on a trial basis, into new areas to determine the economic feasibility of the trial routes.


TRAFFIC

Whereas transit is concerned with the transport of people, traffic is concerned with facilities for the move- ment of vehicles. Examples of such facilities are streets, expressways, parkways, parking, plan lines, and traffic patterns.

Several levels, or orders, of route facilities for the movement of vehicles are now recognized in current planning practice. They are as follows:

Freeways
Expressways
Parkways
Major Streets
Secondary Streets
Local Streets

These different types of trafficways serve various specialized purposes. The treeways provide for high-speed movement of vehicles without interruptions from grade-crossings. The expressway is also geared primarily to traffic moving from one part of the city to another, but because it is characterized by crossings at grade, it is of a lesser order than the freeway. In other words, it is a "limited freeway" or "limited access route". The park-way may be either a freeway or an expressway but differs in its emphasis upon extensive landscaping and park-like
treatment.

The major street is a surface artery onto which intra-city traffic is directed. It represents preference control by which all intersections are either signalized or provided with stop signs at the cross-street approaches. The secondary street acts as a collector of through traffic at or near its point of origin and as a distributor of through traffic at or near its point of destination. The local street has as its prime purpose the provision of access to abutting property (although this is likewise a function of secondary and major streets as well). Typical cross-sections are shown on Plates 7 & 8.

It is the belief of the planning agencies of the City of San Jose that the freeways and expressways of the area should be planned to carry traffic into and from the central business district in order that the central area of the city may be best served. Such freeways can accommodate both local and through traffic and thus benefit neighborhoods without passing through them.

In general, the basic pattern of major streets will assume radial or spider-web characteristics. The radial streets connect the center of the city with the outlying areas, while the circumferential streets allow complete

interchange between the radials and between industrial and commercial centers outside the central business district.  The pattern of streets and highways of the San Jose Metropolitan Area is indicated on Plate 6.  

San Jose is facing the same problem that every other American community is trying to solve -- too much traffic for its existing street system. Street patterns were created before traffic became a problem, and before physical planning emerged as a municipal activity to design street patterns for future needs. Because of its inheritance of an inadequate network of streets, the city cannot avoid creating expensive new thoroughfares and making expensive alterations to existing streets. This is necessary in order to provide for heavier future traffic volumes.  

The City's program for improvement of traffic facilities, to be financed by a bond issue authorized by the voters in June of 1957, is aimed at improving traffic flow so as to reduce both congestion and accidents. To do this, the capacity of existing streets will be increased by the widening of bottlenecks, the joining of unconnected streets in order to provide new arteries, the widening of streets where this expensive step cannot be avoided, the
improving of the design of difficult intersections, and the installing of traffic safety and control devices.

In addition to the above improvements, new expressways will be provided, which will remove heavy, long-trip traffic from major streets serving local traffic needs.

In addition, this will provide better access to the central business district and other congested areas. It will furthermore, provide inter-city and cross-valley routes to connect the more distant parts of the metropolitan area.  

These improvements have been proposed after extensive study of traffic flow maps and consideration of factors such as the location of traffic-generators (sources or causes of large volumes of traffic) and optimum use of land. Traffic flow for the city's streets is indicated on Plate II.
LAND USE ELEMENT OF THE MASTER PLAN

The use of land in conformity with principles based on creating the best possible environment for our people is so fundamental that in substance it could be considered our planning program. The best design of our city generally, and in detail of our neighborhoods, should aim at the ultimate goal of a well-rounded set of values - cultural, sociological, and aesthetic as well as physical or economic.

This element of the Master Plan embraces many phases of the use and occupancy of land. A number of these are separately covered in this plan under other headings such as Schools, Recreation Areas and Parks, Public Buildings, etc. Therefore, this element will be devoted mainly to that phase commonly called zoning.

The three broad classes or categories of land use normally privately controlled are Residential, Commercial, and Industrial. In applying the best principles of design to community planning, clear distinction is made between the living areas and the non-living areas, Zoning is that instrument by which legislative officials, be they of town, city or county, give maximum protection to neighborhood values. By this means, individual homes

TABLE OF CONTENTS

THE HISTORY OF SAN JOSE, CALIFORNIA'S FIRST CITY

The City's First Visitors
The Pueblo is established in 1777

The Alameda connects the Pueblo and Neighboring Mission Santa Clara
California becomes a part of the Mexican Republic in 1825
The California Republic, 1846
San Jose is chosen as the First Capital in 1849
A diversified economy develops
The last quarter of the Nineteenth Century
The Twentieth Century
World War II to date

SAN JOSE'S ROLE IN THE SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA

The Metropolitan Area Concept
The San Jose Metropolitan Area

THE NATURAL RESOURCES
The setting and the land
The Climate and the Air
The Water: Supply and Control
Water Supply
Water Control

THE PEOPLE

CREATIVE RESOURCES

THE PLAN FOR CIRCULATION - ELEMENT OF THE MASTER PLAN
and other types of dwelling units with their needed community facilities, such as schools, parks, recreation areas, churches, and shopping areas are given protection from the intrusion of incompatible uses. This protection is essential in maintaining living amenities and in stabilizing land uses as well as property values.

The Zoning Regulations of the City of San Jose employ the use of the "Police Power” to the fullest by virtue of their comprehensive coverage.

Comprehensive Zoning Regulations cover the entire City of San Jose and embrace;

1. Use Regulations

2. Area Regulations

3. Height Regulations

The Use Regulations of San Jose's Zoning Ordinance or Code distinguish between the various types of residential, commercial, and industrial categories.

The following are the basic categories or classification of its land use provisions:

R-l Residence District (One-Family)

R-2 Residence District (Two-Family)

R-3 Residence District (Multiple-Family)

R-4 Residence District (Multiple-Family).

C Professional.

C-L Commercial Limited.

C-l Neighborhood Commercial.

C-2 General Comercial. 3 stories.

C-3 General Commercial. 6 stories.

M-l Light Industrial. 3 stories.

M-2 Light Industrial. 8 stories.

M-3 Central Business District.

M-4 Heavy Industrial.

Some special uses such as tanneries, etc. are not even included in M-4 except after report by the City Planning Commission and final approval of the City Council.

FURTHERMORE, IN RECOGNITION OF THE CITY'S EXPANSION INTO SUBURBAN, RURAL AND HILLSIDE AREAS, TH ZONING REGULATIONS FOR R-1 RESIDENCE DISTRICT PROVIDE FOR THE PRESERVATION OF AREAS WITH LARGER HOME SITE REQUIREMENTS.  THESE SPECIFICALLY PROVIDE FOR MINIMUM BUILDING SITE AREAS OF 10,000 SQUARE FEET, 20,000 SQUARE FEET AND ONE ACRE LOT SIZE.

ZONING CLASSIFICATIONS DESIGNATING LAND USE, AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS

DISTRICT R-1:

Stories: 2%

Height: 35

Front Yard: 25

Side Yard: Interior 5 - Corner 12.5

Rear Yard: Interior Lot 25 - Corner Lot 25

DISTRICT R-1-B-1:

Stories: 2%

Height: 35

Front Yard: 25

Side Yard: Interior 10 - Corner 12.5

Rear Yard: Interior Lot 25 — Corner Lot 25

DISTRICT R-1-B-2:

Stories: 2%

Height: 35

Front Yard: 30

Side Yard: Interior 15 - Corner 15

Rear Yard: Interior Lot 25 — Corner Lot 25

DISTRICT R-1-B-3:

Stories: 2%

Height: 35

Front Yard: 30

Side Yard: Interior 20 - Corner 20

Rear Yard: Interior Lot 25 - Corner Lot 25

DISTRICT R-2:

Stories: 2%

Height: 35

Front Yard: 20

Side Yard: Interior 5 - Corner 10

Rear Yard: Interior Lot 25 - Corner Lot 25

DISTRICT R-3:

Stories:
Height:

Front Yard:

Side Yard:
Rear Yard:

DISTRICT R-4:

Stories:
Height:

Front Yard:

Side Yard:
Rear Yard:

DISTRICT C:

Stories:
Height:

Front Yard:

Side Yard:
Rear Yard:

DISTRICT C-L:

Stories:
Height:

Front Yard:

Side Yard:
Rear Yard:

DISTRICT C-1:

Stories:
Height:

Front Yard:

Side Yard:
Rear Yard:

DISTRICT C-2:

Stories:
Height:

Front Yard:

Side Yard:
Rear Yard:

3
45
15
Interior 5 - Corner 7.5
Interior Lot 25 - Corner Lot 15

6
75
15
Interior 5 - Corner 7.5
Interior Lot 25 - Corner Lot 15

235

35

15

Interior 5 - Corner 12.5
Interior Lot 25 - Corner Lot 25

3
45
15
Interior 5 - Corner 7.5
Interior Lot 25 - Corner Lot 25

235

35

25

Interior None - Corner 12.5
Interior Lot 25 - Corner Lot 25

3
45
None
Interior None - Corner None
Interior Lot 25 - Corner Lot 15

DISTRICT C-3:

Stories:
Height:
Front Yard:
Side Yard:
Rear Yard:

DISTRICT M-1:

Stories:
Height:
Front Yard:
Side Yard:
Rear Yard:

DISTRICT M-2:

Stories:
Height:
Front Yard:
Side Yard:
Rear Yard:

DISTRICT M-3:

Stories:
Height:
Front Yard:
Side Yard:
Rear Yard:

DISTRICT M-4:

Stories:
Front Yard:
Height:
Side Yard:
Rear Yard:

Stories:
Front Yard:
Height:
Side Yard:
Rear Yard:

6
75
None
Interior None ~ Corner None

Interior Lot None - Corner Lot None

3
45
None
Interior None - Corner None

Interior Lot None = Corner Lot None

8
100
None
Interior None - Corner None

Interior Lot None - Corner Lot None

12
160
None
Interior None « Corner None
Interior Lot None - Corner Lot None

8

None

100

Interior None - Corner None
Interior Lot None - Corner Lot None

ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:

1
60
12
Interior None - Corner 25
Interior Lot None - Corner Lot None


THE NEIGHBORHOOD

San Jose has well established and put into practice the Neighborhood Concept in precise plans and designs for its living areas. The amenities which are basically essential to all residential areas do not simply happen but are the result of careful planning.  The elementary school, the neighborhood recreation facilities for small children and the necessary shopping accommodations for nearby homes are all part of the patterns which make our neighborhoods. In the sections of this Master Plan relating to school sites, recreation facilities planning and local shopping requirements, reference will repeatedly occur to San Jose's neighborhood planning. Also, numerous references will be made to the neighborhood as the "world of the mother and the child." Consequently, careful planning and design is employed in order to prevent the intrusion of incompatable uses and discourage unnecessary traffic throughout the neighborhood areas.

Criteria used in establishing neighborhood areas for San Jose.

1. Physical Features.

a. Size

b. Shape

c. Topography

d. Natural Boundaries

(1) Freeways and Highways

(2) Railroads

(3) Rivers

(4) Industrial Districts

(5) Special Features or Districts

Population Features.

a.  Nature

(1) Racial

(2) Nationality

b. Density

c. Ultimate Population Services.

a. Schools

b. Recreation Facilities

c. Zoning

d. Shopping

e. Transit

f. Economic Levels

g. Police and Fire Protection

h. Health Service
i. Sanitation and Drainage

j. Utilities

Applying these criteria to the entire area within which San Jose is expanding and growing, the City Planning Commission and its staff have established 154 neigh- borhood areas, 92 of which have been designed in detail.  While a few neighborhoods will ultimately have less than 5,000 people and a few others have more than 6,000 people, the 154 neighborhoods of which the greater San Jose will be composed, average 5,850 peoples This represents an ideal size in population. Likewise, the gross acreage of these areas (including streets, schools, etc.) will average approximately three fourths of one square mile in size.
1:
H .
_U
r
...I
a ,
H
W
.H _
1.
_.k_ .

m meow: .. mmsummmuum 90”. m:b_

TABLE OF CONTENTS (cont'd)

TRANSPORTATION - ELEMENT OF THE MASTER PLAN

Railways
Highways
Airways
Waterways
Rapid Transit

TRANSIT
Bus Transit

TRAFFIC

LAND USE - ELEMENT OF THE MASTER PLAN

Zoning Classifications

THE NEIGHBORHOOD

THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT

URBAN RENEWAL

SCHOOLS - ELEMENT OF THE MASTER PLAN

RECREATION - ELEMENT OF THE MASTER PLAN

LIBRARY LOCATIONS

FIRE STATION LOCATIONS

CIVIC CENTER - ELEMNT OF THE MASTER PLAN

CIVIC ART - ELEMNT OF THE MASTER PLAN
LIST OF PLATES

Scope of City Planning

Regional Map of San Jose and Vicinity

Planning Areas for Future Growth

Flood Control Map

San Jose Urban Area

Major Street and Highway Plan

Major Street Cross Sections

Major Street Cross Sections

San Jose Airport Development Plan

Map Showing Existing Transit Routes

Traffic Flow Map

Generalized Land Use Map

Map Showing Neighborhood Areas

Johnson and Brookhaven Neighborhood Design

Map Showing Urban Renewal Areas

Map Showing Elementary School Locations

Map Showing Junior High School Locations

Map Showing Senior High School Locations

Map Showing Neighborhood Recreation Areas

Map Showing District Recreation Areas

Design Plan of Willow Glen Park
THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT

The Central Business District of the City of San Jose has, until recent expansion in the total area of the city, represented approximately 3 percent of the city's size. On the basis of actual acreage, it represents 4 ten-thousands of one percent (.0004) or an insignificant speck in the size of the area of Santa Clara County.  Nevertheless, it has continually raised 26.8 percent of the city's income on an ad valorem basis. This represents income by taxation on Real and Personal property. Further- more, until 1956, this small area of the city was respon- sible for 70 percent of the sales tax income and 98 percent of the parking meter income. Likewise, on an ad valorem basis, it also represented approximately 8 percent of Santa Clara County's income.

It is therefore apparent that a Central Business District, such as San Jose's, should receive every consideration and stimukition possible by both the City of San Jose and Santa Clara County. All means which will give this district protection and stabilize property values should be employed. Also, all stimuli which will enhance the income of San Jose's Central Business District should be applied. Not only the City of San Jose, but all cities
and areas of Santa Clara County will profit by the prosperity of this small area of San Jose and even smaller area, comparatively, of Santa Clara County. It is of even greater significance that the taxable wealth of the central area be maintained insofar as it benefits the San Jose Unified School District.

There are many problems involved in stabilizing and protecting property values and income of a Central Business District. A few important ones are the following:

1. Developing good access to the district.  In San Jose this means the widening of a number of streets. The most urgent was the improvement of San Carlos Street in order that more traffic movement could result. This is now accomplished and a beautiful tree-lined street is the result.  Park Avenue, Almaden Avenue, Julian Street, William Street are a few on which'plan lines" for future widening have been placed.

2. Efficient Regulation of Traffic.

a. Newly placed signals and other traffic control devices are contributing greatly in accomplishing this.

b. One-way streets are another means by which

traffic flow has been improved.

Off-Street Parking.

The City of San Jose has acquired land and cleared buildings in order to provide four large parking areas within the Central Business District. These were provided by funds from the passage of a revenue bond measure of $2,500,000.  A few parcels of land are still to be acquired.  Nevertheless, 1800 parking spaces, (with attendant parking) conveniently located, are now available to the shoppers of downtown San Jose.  Appearance of Central Business District.  Considerable progress needs to be made in improving the appearance of this area. Painting and remodeling have been undertaken by numerous down-town property owners. The aggregation of many signs all extending over the sidewalks of the down-town streets should be replaced with signs placed flat against the buildings. Small, but properly shaped trees and other features which would aid in making these streets more attractive would contribute greatly.

Urban Renewal Program.

A group of alert citizens and business men formed into an organization called "Forward San Jose" has made the redesign and reconstruction of the Central Business District its objective. It is principally through the efforts of this group that a Redevelopment Agency was appointed by the City Council in 1957. Under the section on Urban Renewal will be found the objectives of San Jose's Urban Renewal Program.

occurs in conditions of land and structures and the use of these by people. These factors, generally working in combination, have caused and promoted the local conditions of blight.

1. Conditions of Land:

Widely diversified ownership, multiple ownership,
and defective titles.

Impractical platting, subdivision, and land use.

Changing, mixed and conflicting uses.

Condition of Structures:

Design, construction, maintenance, equipment and facilities inadequate or obsolete or detrimental to health, safety and welfare.  

Changed, mixed and conflicting uses.

Conditions of Use by People:

Overoccupancy.

Poor Maintenance.

Overall Factors:

Population growth and physical change of form or a community.  Ineffective planning, land and occupancy use controls in the past.

URBAN RENEWAL

Each segment of the city has a natural cycle of growth - obsolescence and decay — and then renewal. The coordination of private and public efforts to continue the cycle is necessary in certain areas to insure the economic and physical well being of the city of San Jose. This program is called urban renewal and has three objectives:

1. To prevent existing blight from spreading into adjacent areas.

2. To rehabilitate areas that can be restored economically to a level where they will maintain themselves.

3. To clear and rebuild areas that economically are not worth saving.

City Council has established a Redevelopment Agency to carry out this program. In 1957 the Mayor and the City Council appointed five representative citizens as members of the Agency and provided for a small technical staff. The Agency is working in close coordination with the Planning Department and all other city departments and offices in the preparation of redevelopment plans.

To determine the nature and scope of the problem of blight in San Jose certain factors were evolved. Blight
Design Plan of William Street Park

Community Centers Plan

Map Showing Library Locations

Map Showing Fire Station Location Plan

Civic Center Site Plan

Street Tree Chart

Water Supply - Folsom Reservoir

Water Supply - Diversion Plan
c. Change in living habits and basic modes of transportation.

d. Decentralization of industry, business, and employment from central areas.

e. Owners‘ anticipation of higher values by reason of location.

t. Taxation policies, promoting retention of obsolete and deteriorated properties.

The presence of these conditions results in economic and social decay necessitating:

1. Disproportionate municipal costs in terms of police and fire protection and in the provision of community services and facilities.

2. Loss of tax revenue to the city.

3. Poor living environment tor a part of the citizenry of San Jose.

To determine the resources and tools available for effective urban renewal action, a workable Program is being prepared. This will be the blueprint tor broad urban renewal action and will establish San Jose's eligibility for federal aid. This program has been set up to achieve seven major objectives:

l. Codes and ordinances.

a. Housing standards and occupancy.

b. Building standards of construction and installation.

A comprehensive community plan.

a. Plans and programs of physical development.

(1) Land Use Plan.

(2) Thoroughfare Plan.
(3) Comunity Facilities Plan.
(4) Public.Improvements Program.

b. Administrative and regulatory measures.

Zoning Ordinance.

Subdivision Regulations.

Neighborhood Analyses.

a. City-wide fact-finding respecting blight.

b. Identification of causes of blight.

c. Delineation of residential neighborhoods.

Administrative organization.

a. Enforcement of standards on community-wide basis.

b. Administration of programs for slum prevention and elimination.

Financing.
a. Federal participation under the provisions of the National Housing Act of 1949, as amended.

b. Local contributions for urban renewal activities.

6. Housing for displaced families.

a. Analysis of displacement.

b. Rehousing resources.

7. Citizens participation.

a. Community-wide.

b. Neighborhood.

The designation of specific redevelopment areas where deterioration exists is made by the Redevelopment Agency.  These areas must fit the framework of the Master Plan as developed by the Planning Commission. City Council must finally approve each project after open public hearings.  The typical redevelopment project includes the preparation of a reuse plan for the area, the approval of this plan by the Planning Commission and the City Council, the acquisition at fair market price of the properties which do not fit the reuse plan, the relocation of families, the demolition of improvements, and the disposal of the land for redevelopment usually by private investment,

with the new use or uses determined by marketability studies within the framework of the City's Master Plan.  Under the California Community Redevelopment law, owner participation is provided for if the owners agree to participate in the redevelopment in conformity with the development plan.

The Federal Government will grant outright two-thirds of the net cost of preparing such an area for redevelopment.  The City of San Jose must put up one-third of the net cost in cash from general obligation or tax increment bonds or the operating budget or credits for capital improvements of benefit to the project. The Federal Government also will provide operating capital in the form of loans to cover the costs of survey and planning activities, land acquisitions, relocation and site improvements.

The Map indicating blighted areas in the City of San Jose was based on the factors indicated above. The 12 areas of severe blight are subject to clearance and redevelopment; the 6 areas of less severe blight are subject to rehabilitation and spot clearance. The 2 areas of better homes may realize maintenance through code enforcement.  The continued spread of slums and blight must be

arrested and removed so that the vast private investment in our city will remain sound and continue to expand. In addition, it is necessary through private and public cooperation that our city provide adequate housing for all of its citizens.

In the long run, urban renewal is an investment, not a subsidy, for it is estimated that projects repay their entire public costs in ten to twenty years.




SCHOOLS - ELEMNT OF THE MASTER PLAN

A comprehensive group of educational institutions serving the general public will range all the way from nursery school through college and university. Thus all age levels from the pre-school age child to the adult are served. However, it is usually the approval of school sites for elementary and high school that falls within the scope of the City Planning Commission.  

The City of San Jose, with its expansion and growth, has inherited a tremendous load of school site problems.  In addition to the San Jose Unified School District, nineteen other school districts are represented within the City Limits of the City of San Jose. Furthermore, practically all of these districts operate on the basis of the following three school levels:

Elementary School
Junior High School
Senior High School

Maps showing school site planning for these three levels of education are shown in the accompanying plates numbers 16, 17 and 18.

The City Planning Commission and the City Planning Department, with their heavy emphasis on design, both in
the general areas of the City and in the neighborhood concept, have had a strong traditional relationship with the various school districts. Each neighborhood design is developed with the elementary school as its nucleus.  Since the neighborhood is considered "The World of the Mother and the Child," all areas subdivided are carefully studied as to their significance in the neighborhood pat- tern. Subdividers are urged to leave undeveloped logical school site areas. Likewise, officials of the particular school districts affected are urged to enter into immediate negotiations for necessary school sites. This avoids both the loss of ideally located sites and the necessity of purchasing property later at enhanced prices.

LIST OF TABLES

Population Potential of San Jose Planning Areas.

Present Population of Cities Bordering San Jose.

Present Population of other Cities or Santa Clara County.

Age Percentage Distribution of Population by sex.

Neighborhood Area and Population Data.

SCHOOL DISTRICTS SERVED BY THE CITY PLANNING COMMISSION AND THE CITY PLANNING DEPARTMENT OF THE CITY OF SAN JOSE

E1ementary_School Districts

1. Alviso
2. Alum Rock
3. Berryessa
4. Burbank
5. Cambrian
6. Campbell
7. Cupertino
8. Franklin McKinley
9. Jefferson
10. Los Gatos
11. Mbreland
12. Oak Grove
13. Orchard
14. San Jose Unified
15. Union High School Districts
16. Campbell Union
17. Eastside Union
18. Fremont Union
19. Los Gatos Union

20. Santa Clara Union

NOTE: The Almaden and Sunol School Districts have become part of the San Jose Unified School District.


RECREATION - ELEMNT OF THE MASTER PLAN

San Jose is a typical American city in the sense of its strong and broad concepts of public recreation. Its ideal all-year climate encourages the maximum use of outdoor facilities.

A comprehensive system of recreation facilities is complete when it serves the leisure hours of our public in providing activities based on the following:

1. Broad Range of Activities - both active and passive, e. g., baseball, football, tennis, basketball, woodcraft, music, folk dancing, dramatics, hiking, swimming, contemplation of Iauna and flora, etc.

2. All Age Groups.

3. All Hours of the Day and Evening.

San Jose has developed programs based on the three factors mentioned, and as a consequence is developing and providing facilities which require many sites and locations, as well as structures and buildings of varied types and accommodations.

An ideal comprehensive group of recreation facilities should consist of tour levels of facilities. Each one of the first three are developed on an area basis and

serve people on the basis of age groups as well. They are designated geographically in plates numbered 19, 20 and 23.

Briefly they are described as follows:

Neighborhood Recreation Areas.

These are areas with facilities serving pre-school age children and the younger elementary school age children. They are, as a rule, developed on the grounds of elementary schools, though sometimes also on part of the site of a District Park in addition. They are part of the neighborhood concept and are similar to the elementary school as part of "The World of the Mother and the Child." These facilities usually consist of small turfed areas with swings, teters, sandboxes, etc. The City of San Jose, through its City Council and Recreation Commission, is continually entering into contracts with school district officials for the placing of these play facilities on elementary school grounds.

District Recreation Areas.

These comprise the major activity centers of the teen-age and adult population of the City of San

Jose. They are spaced so as to serve areas with a radius of three quarters of a mile consisting of from four to six neighborhoods. They range in size from ten to twenty-seven acres and contain facilities such as baseball diamonds, tennis courts, basketball courts, a field house, etc. All of these areas are developed to serve both as recreation areas and parks. In this respect they are surrounded by paved streets, street trees, and are well-landscaped in order that they may have both utility and beauty.  

The City of San Jose has been buying these areas as rapidly as possible in order to stay as well ahead of urban development as possible and to avoid increasing prices. The June 1957 general obligation bond issue included $2,500,000 for these community projects, $900,000 of which was designated for new district parks or recreation areas.

Community Centers.

These are facilities such as Community Buildings, Junior High School and Senior High School Structures.  They have gymnasiums, shops, halls for
music and drama, swimming pools, and numerous facilities which can serve people, mostly adults, during day and evening hours. To duplicate these structures purely for recreation program purposes would require many millions of taxpayers‘ dollars.  In most cases it would be entirely impossible to provide unless coordination is effected with school department officials.  

Specialized Areas.

These include those facilities which are not developed on an area basis but are isolated in type and location. They consist of such items as Mountain Camps, Public Golf Courses, Stadia, Major Aquatic Centers, Regional Parks, etc.  San Jose has its Lake Tahoe Camp Site, Alum Rock Park, Kelley Park, The Mnicipal Auditorium, Municipal Baseball Stadium, etc.



"Now, how shall I describe a landscape so unlike anything else in the world--with a beauty so new and dazzling that all ordinary comparisons are worthless? A valley ten miles wide, through the center of which winds the dry bed of a winter stream, whose course is marked with groups of giant sycamores, their trunks gleaming like silver through masses of glossy foliage: over the level floor of this valley park-like groves of oaks, whose mingled grace and majesty can only be given by the pencil: in the distance, redwoods rising like towers; westward, a mountain chain, nearly four-thousand feet in height--showing, through the blue haze, dark-green forests on a background of blazing gold: eastward, another mountain-chain, full-lighted by the sun--rose-color, touched with violet shadows, shining with a marvelous transparency, as if they were of glass, behind which shone another sun: overhead, finally, a sky whose blue luster seemed to fall, mellowed, through an intervening veil of luminous vapor. No words can describe the fire and force of the coloring--the daring contrasts, which the difference of half a tint changed from discord into harmony . . . . . . . . ."

"I had another and a grander dream. A hundred years had passed, and I saw the valley, not, as now, only partially tamed and reveling in the wild magnificence of Nature, but from river-bed to mountain-summit humming with human life. I saw the same oaks and sycamores, but their shadows fell on mansions which were fair as temples, with their white fronts and long colonnades: I saw gardens, refreshed by gleaming fountains--estates peeping from the gloom of laurel bowers--palaces, built to enshrine the new Art which will then have blossomed here--culture, plenty, peace, happiness everywhere . . . . . . . . . Was it only a dream?"

A Word Picture of the San Jose
Area in September of 1859 ---
from New Pictures of California

By Bayard Taylor
LIBRARY LOCATIONS

The administration of the City of San Jose firmly believes that a system of public libraries is a most important part of our public education system. The public library, furthermore, presents a constant and continuing opportunity for the citizens to develop and strengthen their social and cultural ideals.

In addition to a well-located central library, the accompanying map indicates sites where branch libraries are to be located. This concept is fundamental to the re- quirement that a good public library service should be freely available to the entire population of a city.

Since the basic planning for a city of San Jose's physical character and widespread population is conceived and designed on the neighborhood concept, the branch library locations are established to serve groups of from four to six neighborhoods.

The people of San Jose manifested their belief in the cultural and educational values of a public library system by the passage of a bond issue in June 1957, which included $500,000 for branch libraries. This will serve 

to provide the following facilities:

Civic Center Branch 1
Mborpark Area Branch 1
Southwest San Jose Branch 1

In addition, a fourth branch library is being built out of general funds and is being located in the Herbert Hoover Junior High School Area. The locations of each of these is indicated on Plate 24.

FIRE STATION LOCATIONS

The treatment of physical facilities for public safety constitutes one of the several elements of the Master Plan. One of the most important functions of government is the protection of life and property through efforts to prevent and combat the hazards of fire.

The people of San Jose recognized the pressing need for improvement and expansion of fire protection facilities when, in November of 1952 and again in June of l957, they approved the issuance of bonds to secure the necessary monies for future fire station improvements. In addition to gaining adequate fire protection coverage for the city as it expands and develops, the citizens of this city will profit by a more favorable class rating by the National Board of Fire Underwriters.

The map accompanying this element of the Master Plan indicates locations where new facilities for both equipment and men will be located. With the development of these new facilities, the newer areas of the City of San Jose will be served with the degree of fire protection deemed necessary to meet fire underwriters standards.

In addition to well-planned facilities for new areas, constant thought is given to maintaining the same high

degree of service and standards in the older portions of the City of San Jose. The central business district, and partic- ularly the high value portions of this district, require the maximum of modern fire protection facilities because of the high percentage of relatively old and highly inflammable structures. The expansion of new and improvement of existing facilities to a degree necessary to meet present and future needs is the aim of the City's administration in planning for a system of twenty-six fire station locations.  A comprehensive and detailed report entitled "Fire Stations Location Plan" is separately published. 

It briefly involves the following:

A. Nature of Fire Department.
1. Administration and Organization.
2. Operation.
3. Personnel.
B. Physical Fire Station Plant.
1. Description of Stations.
2. Description of Equipment.
C. Program for Fire Station Development.
1. Schedule.
2. Financing.

  

CIVIC CENTER - ELEMNT OF THE MASTER PLAN.

The use of symbolic structures for interpreting and expressing the spirit and individuality of men and their communities has been customary since the beginning of history. The cities of Greek and Roman history are best remembered for their Parthenons and Forums. One of the best and most expressive methods of crystalizing a city's spirit is to mold its public buildings into one monumental group. Furthermore, the orderly grouping of public offices is a great convenience to the citizens of a city.

The people of the City of San Jose have had several street and community plans dating back to l9l7 when George A. Damon submitted his report on streets and parks.  The first formal approach to solving the Civic Center problem was made in 1920. However, it must be remembered that the first American Capital of California was in San Jose on a site adjacent to the present City Hall on Market Street. This site also was the Plaza of the original Spanish Pueblo and, of course, has long historial significance. The present City Hall was built on this same site in 1887.

The City of San Jose adopted a Civic Center Plan in 1931 which selected the City Hall Plaza as the best of


12 proposals. A bond issue was successfully passed the following year and the first unit of the plan, the Municipal Auditorium, was completed and dedicated in 1934.

After numerous studies of varying proposals, the new government center site at First Street and Rosa Street began to assume positive shape. This new approach to the problem was developed since World War II. It has finally assumed form as a governmental building group.

Santa Clara County is about to commence construction of a fourth building at this site. The City of San Jose, with plans on the drawing boards for a fourth building also, (the Police Garage Building) will add its share to a group of eight buildings. It the two Armory buildings on the northerly side of Rosa Street are added, a significant grouping of ten public buildings is represented. Numerous additional buildings such as Courts, Branch Library, etc.  are yet to be considered. The State of California and the Federal Government are both considering facilities which may join this list of buildings.

Plans for acquiring more land are now being given most serious study. The original site of 66 acres will thereby be enlarged by considerably more acreage. A plan of the principal site is shown in Plate 26.

LIST OF BUILDINGS FOR GOVERNMENT CENTER.

FIRST STREET AND ROSA STREET.

PRESENT FUTURE
AGENCY BUILDINGS BUILDINGS

City of
San Jose City Hall Branch Library
Health Center
Communication
Police Garage
County of

Santa Clara Administration Administration
and Fiscal

Jail Courts
Juvenile Hall Communication

State of

California National Guard Administration

Armory
U. S. Government Army Reserve Administration

Armory



I397

PROPERTY OF
A '7

'_ ,_‘.t' I I

   

__%__4u. -tw-;_

A,:",;_;; .\‘('lL.\i{'lA \’I:}!lT:\—S

 

jjjj:_—n._—.L._:.._._::-:-

CIVIC ART - ELEMNT OF THE MASTER PLAN.

Street Trees.

San Jose is vitally interested in creating those urban amenities which a high state of civilization requires.  It is more and more stressing those values which bring charm, beauty and comfort to the various areas of the city as it develops and grows. San Jose has been living with the firm idea of "Never Sell Beauty Short.”

Careful treatment of streets, parks, school sites, public building sites, river-banks and other open spaces with well-developed landscaping is giving San Jose the true character of an outstanding city.

San Jose, commonly referred to as the Garden City, has been "tree conscious" since its very beginning as a pueblo.  At the turn of the century this consciousness was manifested by the planting of many hundreds of Melia Azedarach Umbraculiformis or Umbrella Tree. Unfortunately, this is not a long-lived tree and only a few now remain on the streets of this city. Three decades ago, the City Planning Commission,consistent with its emphasis on urban aesthetics, authorized a staff survey of all trees bordering the several hundred miles of city streets. Imediately upon the completion of this survey, a list of adaptable trees was established and a comprehensive street tree plan was

adopted. This was followed by the adoption of an ordinance regulating the planting care and removal of all trees on public thoroughfares.  The list of trees approved by the City of San Jose is a compilation of 66 trees of varies types, sizes, foliage, rate of growth, ultimate size and other important character- istics. However, for purposes of brevity, the following twenty-three species have been designated for the 482 miles of San Jose's streets.

Ash, Modesto

Ash, Mountain

Birch, European

Carob

Camphor

Chestnut, Flowering

Elm, Chinese

Gingko (Male)

Hawthorn, Carriere

Hawthorn, Washington

Linden, European

Liquidambar

Locust, Pink Flowering

Magnolia, Southern

Maple, Norway

Maple, Schwedler

Oak, California Live

Palm

Pistache, Chinese

Plum, Purpleleaf

Sycamore

Tulip Tree

Zelkova

That this concentration of work and emphasis is "paying off" is evidenced in many respects. One of these is recognition of San Jose by Norman D. Ford, as one of the five beautiful cities of this country.
THE HISTORY OF SAN JOSE, CALIFORNIA'S FIRST CITY.

San Jose, as California's oldest civil community, has a rich history of events and great personalities that should serve its present citizens as a basis for the finest of city planning. From 1777, when it was established as California's first Spanish pueblo, to the time when it was California's first Capital, to the present when it is experiencing the most rapid growth of any California community, San Jose has been a leader among the cities of the State. For this reason, a history of more detail than is customary in the Master Plans of Cities is given in this report.

The City's First Visitors: The future site of San Jose was first traversed on November 26, 1770 when Lt. Pedro Fages, the first commandante of the Presidio of Monterey, led a party on an unsuccessful attempt to encircle San Francisco Bay. The future city was formally established seven years later on November 29, 1777 as El Pueblo de San Jose de Guadalupe (the town of Saint Joseph on the River Guadalupe) upon the recommendation of Don Felipe de Neve, Governor of California under King Carlos III of Spain. Thus began the recorded history of San Jose, the first city of the State.

Lt. Fages had visited the Valley of Santa Clara the year previous when he was a member of a party led by the then Governor of the Peninsula of California, Don Gaspar de Portola. Scouts of the party reported to Portola that they had seen an "immense arm of the sea, or an estuary, which penetrated into the land as far as the eye could reach, extending to the southeast; that they had seen some beautiful plains, well adorned with trees, and that the smoke which they saw in all directions left no doubt that the country was thickly populated with heathen villages."

The Indian residents of these "heathen villages" were of little trouble to the early visitors to the valley.  They were in general docile, dirty, timid and slow to war.  The Indians dressed either in mud, grasses, furs -- or went naked -- as the prevailing weather dictated. They enjoyed a varied diet of sea food, wild game and lived in huts of willow twigs. Because of the great diversity of Indian stocks and tongues in the valley, their customs, beliefs and tribal organizations varied widely from village to village.

The Pueblo is Established in 1777: The site selected for California's first civil settlement in November of
1777 was on the east bank of the Guadalupe River about a mile and a quarter north of the city's present center.  As a "pueblo"--or farming community--San Jose's purpose was to provide food for the Presidios of Monterey and San Francisco.

Nine familied soldier-farmers from the two Presidios formed the core of the colonizing group of 68 individuals who established the new city. The disappointments and frustrations of the Archuletas, Amesquitas, Gonzales, Vasques and other Spanish families were many over the next few years. Crops failed and floods often destroyed their irrigation works.

In 1784, Fages, then Governor of Alta California, granted three soldier-settlers additional land for grazing and thus inaugurated the system of private land grants which were later known as ranchos. Each of the four types of settlements established by the Spanish in California were represented in the Santa Clara Valley, the mission, the pueblo, the rancho and the presidio (as represented by soldiers from San Francisco who were stationed at the Mission).

The settlers asked for permission to move the Pueblo from its oft-flooded marshy site to higher ground in about

1791 to its present site which centers about the present City Hall Plaza on Market Street.

The Alameda Connects the Pueblo and Neighboring Mission Santa Clara: In the last decade of the century, San Jose flourished under the wise guidance of the Governor of that period. Relations with the Mission fathers improved to the point that a dispute regarding the boundary between the Mission and the Pueblo was amicably settled by the establishment of the Guadalupe River as the dividing line.  To cement these improved relations, the Mission fathers in 1799 layed out The Alameda and bordered it with willows.

San Jose's population increased from the 68 at the time of founding to 171 in 1800, An adobe town hall was built in l797-8 in the center of the Market Plaza at Post and Market Streets. The idea of a Pueblo chapel was conceived in 1799 and the chapel was dedicated to St. Joseph in 1803.

The yields of the grain fields of the Pueblo were excellent and experiments in the cultivation of hemp and flax were begun in 1797 upon orders of the King of Spain.  Livestock increased in numbers from 980 to about 6600.  

California's first school was opened in 1797 in the Pueblo granary and parents were compelled to send their

3.. lid

.5

children at a monthly charge of 85 cents per child.  

California Becomes a Part of the Mexican Republic in 1825: California, under the rule of Spain for the first quarter of the 19th Century, became a part of the Mexican Republic on March 25, 1825. During this last period of Spanish domination, San Jose experienced a comparatively slow growth. Its residents were content to lead an easy-going life amidst the troubled alarms that brought either news of Indian raids on outlying settlements or excursions of foreign frigates along the Coast.

The first of the large private land grants in California was made in the San Jose area in 1802 when Marian Castro was granted some 24,000 acres in South Santa Clara Valley. This was called the Rancho Las Animas or Sitio de la Brea. Fruit trees were now in bearing and the experiment in raising hemp was considered a success.  Trade with American whalers and Russian fur traders was accomplished via The Embarcadero (near Alviso) in large scow-like boats which carried the produce up the bay to San Francisco.

The first foreign settler to come to the Valley was the Scotchman, John Gilroy, who came in 1814. Gilroy, and those such as Thomas Doak, Robert Livermore and

Antonio Sunol who followed him, married into the families of the earlier Spanish settlers, the Ortegas, the Castros, the Higueros, etc. The names of these early residents remain with us on the maps of the area.  

The California ggpublic, 1846: San Jose continued to grow slowly during the era of Mexican rule as foreign settlers, especially Americans, made their way to California. The Pueblo was at the center of the cross-roads of intrigue that was destined to make California a part of the United States.

Believing that California should be a sovereign state and not a dependent Mexican Territory, a force under Juan Bautista Alvarado, started from San Jose for Monterey in 1836 to wrest control from the Mexican authorities. A new government was consolidated after the surrender of November 4 under the group leadership of Alvarado, Castro and Vallejo--men who were to take a prominent place in California history.

The first evidence that the United States was officially interested in California was the offer of President Andrew Jackson in 1835 to buy the San Francisco Bay Region from Mexico. The number of Americans in California increased rapidly during the next ten years. The

United States Consulate of Monterey was informed in 1845 that the President would be receptive to the desire or the people of California to become a State.

The Bear Flag Revolt, the first active statehood effort, occurred in Sonoma on June 14, 1846 when Mexican General Vallejo was forced to surrender the city to a band of Americans. The victors painted a star, a grizzly bear and the words "California Republic" on a white cloth and raised the new standard. Soon thereafter, Commodore John Sloat entered Monterey Bay and raised the stars and stripes over the custom house on July 2, 1846.

San Jose was the site of the only real conflict in the freedom effort. Opposing forces of Mexicans and Americans met within sight of the Mission Santa Clara and San Jose on January 2, 1847. On January 8th, the Mexican General Sanchez accepted the American Terms of peace and thus ended the war in Northern California. The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo which ended the Mexican War was not signed until February 2, 1848.

San Jose is Chosen as the First Capital in 1849: Military rule existed in California until the adoption of a State Constitution by a Constitutional Convention which

met in Monterey in September of 1849. The constitution

was approved by the voters of California on November 13, 1849 and San Jose was designated as the first American capital of California.

To obtain the capital, San Joseans had to promise suitable quarters for the Legislature which was to convene on December 15, 1849. A recently built two-story adobe hotel located on the east side of present Market Street, between San Fernando and San Antonio Streets, was purchased and remodeled for Assembly and Senate Chambers.

The boom in San Jose, triggered by the Gold Rush, made living accommodations for the first legislators both scarce and expensive. The crude living conditions -- plus a year in which about 36 inches of rain fell -- were sufficient to make the legislators discouraged with San Jose as a capital site. This first Legislature, however, did find time to incorporate San Jose as a city, California's first, on March 27, 1850.

The Legislature passed the matter of selection of the site for the permanent Capital to a vote of the people who accepted an offer or General Vallejo of land and money if the site was in the city which was named for him. The legislature convened in Vallejo for the second

session but finding completely inadequate quarters,

II. cll ll. [‘[![s.[:J[:1[llJ[1l:[L\‘l;I.[ I fit II. [I

returned to San Jose. Despite valiant efforts of the citizens of San Jose to retain the Capital, the Legislature moved back to Vallejo, then to Sacramento, then to Benicia and finally again to its permanent site in Sacramento.  During this period of uncertainty as to the location of the Capital, California was admitted to Statehood on September 9, 1850.

A Diversified Economy Develops: At the century's half-way mark, the city had less than 5,000 people. Santa Clara County had about 8,000 people, about three-fourths of whom were Californian and American citizens. Life centered about the old Plaza from San Carlos to Santa Clara Streets. The Alameda was a willow and sycamore lined road down which once a day clattered the San Francisco stage.

The period between 1850 and 1860 was a period of widespread building. About 100 houses were built in each of the first few years, many of them designed by the city's first architect, Levi Goodrich. Five hotels were built in 1850 and sixteen brick stores were erected in 1859 alone.  

During this 10 year period, the citizens of the area were active in numerous enterprises. Agriculture

'|..\-ll1-r-I._1.f.|.5HlI7.fIL.rll.:T.l: [II In- flu l [M r.In1f-lﬂjrllrll

-A-want
-twain

lllllllll

was becoming more diversified as orchards and vineyards proved as rewarding as the gold fields. A railroad to San Francisco was planned and mills and stage stations in the area became the present sites of the cities of Saratoga, Gilroy, Mountain View, Milpitas, Mayfield, Los Gates and Agnew. California's first colleges, the College of the Pacific, the University of Santa Clara and the Notre Dame Academy, were all founded here by 1851.

The water problem of the day was unexpectedly solved in 1854 when artesian water supply was tapped for the first time. A well on San Fernando Street flowed a stream 4 feet wide by six inches deep for six weeks despite all efforts to cap it.

The railroad, planned in 1851 but delayed by the Civil War, was completed to San Jose in 1864, and gave the city a boom almost equal to that of the Gold Rush. Land values rose sharply and the numbers of new enterprises climbed abruptly. Businesses that are still in existence were begun in the sixties, among them Hart's Department Store, Herold's Shoe Store, Kocher's Jewlers and Wendt's Meats.

The Last Quarter of the Nineteenth Century: San Jose, for the remainder of the century, continued its

growth. The State Normal School (now San Jose State College) and the Lick Observatory became objects of community pride. Horse car lines carried its citizens above the mud of the unpaved streets. The first canneries were started and 171 manufacturing establishments employed 761 persons in 1870. Alum Rock Park was reserved for the City in 1872.

The Santa Clara Valley was now in the third of its four economic eras. Prior to the gold rush, practically the sole economic activity was the production of hides and tallow from the herds of cattle and sheep which liter- ally covered the valley. The second era, lasting until about 1875, saw grain fields replacing the grazing lands or the cattlemen. The third era began in the 1870's when the dried prune became popular; orchard plantings of fruits and nuts increased phenomenally from a total of 20,000 acres in the 80's to almost 100,000 by the turn of the century. The last -- and present -- era of industry was soon to follow.

The eighties brought another boom to San Jose as the City's population swelled with a large influx of settlers. The City was improving its streets, sewers and bridges, and orchards were displacing grazing fields
[IE

and ancient oaks. Plans to light the city by electricity resulted in the erection of the famous Electric Tower that straddled Market and Santa Clara Streets for over 30 years. The tower stood 237 feet high and had among many other lights, six lights with candle power of 4,000 feet. Electric street railroads gradually replaced horse-drawn cars in the late 1800's.

The depression of the 1890's slowed San Jose's growth and gave her time to integrate her newcomers with the old timers who had seen the city develop from a scattering of mud huts. Neighboring communities of Palo Alto, Morgan Hill and San Martin came into existence.  San Jose paved First Street between Santa Clara and San Salvador Streets.

The Twentieth Century: An earthquake and a world war interrupted the growth of San Jose during the first- quarter of the 20th Century. The 1906 earthquake caused much property damage and the loss of 16 lives on April 18.  Stores, schools, churches and homes collapsed and comunity life was disrupted for a number of years. Most damaged buildings were either replaced or repaired by 1910.  

The city's population increased 50% during the ten year period ending in l930, and stood at 58,000. The
III I III m I  JIN%»[\lJ£‘x[‘  fl‘

County's population had increased to 145,000 in 1930 as new homes were built in the valley and on the foothills.

San Jose, traditionally first in so many things, became one of the first cities in California to install the City Manager form of government. Of the Freeholders who prepared the Charter for the new system, John D.  Crummey and Irving L. Ryder still maintain an active interest in community affairs.

San Jose and its neighboring areas saw beginning experiments in automobiles, aviation, radio and the motion picture in the early 1900's. Agriculture and manufacturing continued to expand during this era.

World War II to Date: World War II brought San Jose to the verge of another boom period as servicemen and defense workers stationed in the San Francisco Bay Area selected the Valley for a future homesite. During the 1940-50 decade, San Jose and Santa Clara County had respective rates of population growth of 39% and 66% compared to a statewide rate of 53%. For the period between 1950 and 1956, comparable figures for the City, the County and the State have been 34%, 59% and 28% respectively. Now, in 1958, the City's population
is approximately 145,000; whereas, the County's is approaching 550,000.

Since World War II, over 200 new manufacturing and distributing industries have located in the County. These firms alone have invested over $200,000,000 in facilities and have an annual payroll of about $100,000,000 for their more than 25,000 employees.

In Retrospect: Don Felipe de Neve, the Governor of California under the Crown of Spain in 1777, first saw the potential of the San Jose Area when he recommended that it be the site of California's first civil settlement.  Throughout its long and eventful history, San Jose has achieved an important place in the development of the State. In addition to being the first Spanish Pueblo, it was the State's first Capital, the first incorporated City, and one of the first to adopt the efficient City Manager form of government. San Jose is destined to become a large city, and with vision and foresight, it can become one of America's great cities.
MASTER PLAN
of the
City of San Jose, California

January 1958

Cﬁriginal from
UNWERSITY OF MICHIGAN

‘HUN L'
. (KI

-;,(

WIA 1 A ﬂ 4 a . a _ q _ _u 4 a _ H M. lur... - . .1 u_9553%2-mav%_o._u5_92é::§zaB%_m_%__§o_c_m§%__ea
mmRmN$o2omm.%E:Nombmc.m_E2._u£EE \ ._._>_O moam Hm.wo.mSN co :s_m$>_c3 EOEBB B_%m: ;8E< commC£ oﬁemcmo

SAN JOSE‘S ROLE IN THE [unintelligible] BAY AREA.

Prior to about 1900, a city's population was satisfactorily determined by counting the numbers of people who found it advantageous to live and work within its municipal boundaries. Principally, because of improvements in transportation, many ;.¢ple whose chief interests are centered in a large city now live in either suburban or in rural areas. It has, LntieIo;c, become more mean- ingful to speak of metropolitan areas as communities than to treat each municipality as a self—sufficient unit. San Jose's iaanrtast role as a metropolitan area within the larger San Francisco Bay Area is discussed in this section.

The Metropolitan Area Concept: For purposes of population study, the Bureau of the Census in 1950 divided California's 58 counties into 17 economic areas, these being further classified as eight standard metropolitan areas and nine non-metropolitan areas. The eight metropol- itan areas are San Francisco, San Jose, Sacramento, Stockton, Fresno, Los Angoles, San Diego and San Bernardino.  The separation of Santa Clara County —— the geographic area of the San Jose Motropolitan Area —- from the traditional grouping or the eight Bay Area Counties is indicative
of the growing economic importance of the County. San Jose is, therefore, developing a metropolitan complex of its own and becoming less and less dependent upon San Francisco
and the Bay Area.

Planners can see this whole metropolitan complex as an organic unit which, properly coordinated, can best meet the needs of the people. Keeping in mind the interrelationship of San Jose to the Bay Area, the place of San Jose and its importance can be studied with more meaning.

The San Jose Metropolitan Area: The importance of the San Jose Metropolitan Area (Santa Clara County) as an economic force may best be seen from a brief review of statistics concerning the county.

In 1957, its half-million people are about 4% of the State's population. The 200,000 of its residents who are employed have a yearly personal income of about $1,200,000,000, 8% of the total for the State. Its agricultural income of almost $100,000,000 places it 5th in order of the State's 58 counties. Seven counties exceed Santa Clara County's land valuation of almost $225,000,000 but only five counties exceed the county's net valuation of assessed property of almost $700,000,000. Few counties
fro ITI

Ciriginal
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN

‘UU*»‘|k'
I 

.(

m_moom._oQ#mm:|mmmuum\9o.Hm:b_Emc;<:<:s\\dﬁc \ _owN:_m__o.m_mooO _c_mEoQ 23:;
mm?mmawoﬂomma9::Nombmc.m_EE._u£Et; \ ._._>_o moam Hm.wo.mSN co tﬁ_m_w>_c3 E2229 Lm_nEmI ;8uc< commfoh cﬁemcmo

exceed her in value or building permits being granted each year -- almost $210,000,000 worth were issued in 1956. Investments in new industrial plant capacity exceeded $130,000,000 in 1956.  

These and other equally impressive figures indicate that the County and its Cities are growing at unprecedented rates in all respects. It the present rate or growth continues, the San Jose Metropolitan Area will become one of the four or five most important economic areas of the West Coast.

The City of San Jose, as the hub of the Metropolitan Area, will continue to expand its boundaries and to embrace a greater percentage of the total population or the County. San Jose now has a land area of almost 40 square miles and a population or about 145,000. within ten years, it is reasonable to expect a land area of 100 square miles and a population of 260,000.

Because of its prominence in the system, San Jose has accepted responsibility for the planning of the entire area which is likely to come within the City's boundaries.  Just as the cities encircling the Bay have common interests, so do the cities in San Jose's immediate area have comon interests in matters of economics, education, recreation,
circulation and cultural facilities. San Jose has always been ready to join -- and exert leadership -- in the planning of the areas adjacent to its expected boundaries.

San Jose is intimately concerned with development in the contiguous comunities of Alviso, Campbell, Cupertino, Los Gatos, Milpitas, Monte Sereno, Santa Clara, Saratoga and Sunnyvale. Ot concern, but to a lesser degree, is the development in the cities of Gilroy, Los Altos, Los Altos Hills, Morgan Hill, Mountain View and Palo Alto, all of which are farther out from the center of San Jose.

San Jose has divided the entire area within the City's sphere of annexation influence into districts for planning purposes. (See Plate No. 3) The overall land-use pattern for the same area is shown on Plate No. 12.

Of interest is the population potential of 851,000 for San Jose's planning areas. (See Table 1) The potential population of 2,250,000 in the County and 1,500,000 in San Jose and its immediately neighboring cities will make the area one of the important population centers of the nation.
aw

NA
512*‘!
.544
A4
I958


Original from
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN

:-, (;«3L1(~;l\“

m_moomﬁmuwwmsnmmwuum\m._o.um:b__tm;.>>>>2<\HUE \ umN_u_m_u.m_mooO .c_mEoo 23:;
mmtmﬂwoﬂomm.%ERNoN:oc.m_E2._o£>BE \ ._._>_o oam Hm.wo.mSN co tﬁ_m_m>_c3 E9589 Lw_nEm_._ 2892 commCou_ uﬂemcoo

Population Potential of San Jose

Metropolitan Area 1,500,000 

Population Potential of Santa Clara Countv 2,250,000

Wise and far-sighted planning becomes more important as we project the many present-day problems several decades into the future. The value of specific planning for thoroughfares, water supply, sanitation, drainage, schools and park sites will become more evident as the population of the San Jose area grows to four or five times its present population.
THE NATURAL RESOURCES

Bayard Taylor's word-picture of the San Jose area of almost 100 years ago described well the attractions that have lured so many of its half-million people to the Santa Clara Valley. Although changed in some respects by the passage or time, the climate, the land and the water are still major attractions. A brie: review of these tactors and the problems associated with their use may be of valuable assistance to those who have the responsibility or planning the wise use or these most valuable of all resources.

The Setting and the Land: Situated some thirty miles southeast or San Francisco and a similar distance south of Oakland, Santa Clara County enjoys a state of mutual interdependence with communities both on the peninsula and in the East Bay Area.

The county is bordered on the northwest by San Mateo County, on the north by Alameda County, on the east by Stanislaus and Merced Counties, on the south by San Benito County, and the southwest by Santa Cruz County.  In the center or the county is most or the tertile Santa Clara Valley.
11 February, 1958

To the Honorable City Council
Of the City of San Jose, California

Gentlemen:

Submitted herewith for your information is a "Master
Plan" for the City and Vicinity of San Jose, California,
as proposed by the Planning Commission. Its purpose is to
guide future development of the city by showing that which
can be anticipated rather than leave growth to follow an
unguided course. Since San Jose has a most interesting
history, some space has been devoted to the interesting
past of this city.

Respectfully submitted,

     

Roy M. Butcher, President
Planning Commission

Michael H. Antonacci
Director & Secretary
The valley, an intermediate valley in the Coastal Range, occupies an elongated trough between the Diablo Range on the east and the Santa Cruz Mountains on the west. Extending in a northwest and southeast direction, it is essentially a down-dropped block of its two bordering ranges.

The neighboring ranges are characterized by faults and folds. The most prominent or the raults in the region are the San Andreas fault in the Santa Cruz Mountains and the Hayward fault in the Diablo Range.

Beginning at the south end of San Francisco Bay, where it is almost twenty miles wide, the valley extends southeast some twenty-five miles to Coyote Narrows, where its bordering mountain ranges almost converge. Below the Narrows, it gradually widens again until it is about ten miles wide at the southern end of the county. The valley terminates in the mountains of San Benito County to the south.

The valley rises from sea level in the north to about four hundred feet at the south end of the county.  It is drained by Coyote Creek and the Guadalupe River, the County's major streams, and their tributaries.
Soils in the San Jose area vary in their chemical and physical properties in accordance with differences in parent material, drainage, and age and degree of development since their deposition. Factors which influence the rormation and location of soil types are erosion, shifting drainage channels, tidal flooding, weathering and leaching and percolation of waters.

Alluvial deposits of eroded material from the bordering mountains form the valley floor. As the parent material was washed down, stream beds carried it to new locations. Inasmuch as the stream channels have continuously shiited their location, there is very little regularity in the pattern or soil types throughout the valley.

Rich, fine-textured soils of the highest agricultural value occupy the flood
plains immediately adjacent to stream channels throughout the valley. These
well-drained soils are suited to a wide variety or crops. The San Jose area, in
general, fortunately has this type of soil.  OI special concern is the
basin-like area of the valley which has a tine-textured soil that is poorly
drained because of an underlay of clay hard-pan.
I‘!

I‘ I‘ ‘II " ‘I "II ‘a .

mmRmN$omSmm.QuE\RoNbm:.m_EE._u£\_SE \ ._.$_D

D‘-‘-“"‘“"*" 0" C'‘’08lC UN|VE(F%_£.i|§T’iY?8|Ffl:..:)|rCnH|GAN

I l I 2moomﬁa#wm:|mmwwwm<m._o.um$»w+..mmc.2§$$£ﬁ: T.®w.mu_m_u.w+®®¢0 .:_m..t.®myu__n:n_

O_HN Hm:wO:mHON CO ?ﬁ_m._m>_c3 _o._ot._mumV ._w_Qaw_._ >>w._UC< commfoh _oBm._wcwO

hard-pan. Plate No. 4 indicates soils of varying percolation characteristics. Within each of the classirications the following general conditions can be expected:

CLASS I: Good percolation characteristics.  These soil types are light textured recent alluvial loams with the sub-soils the same as the surface soils.  Permeability is good to excellent.

CLASS II: Good percolation characteristics. These soil types are heavy textured silt, clay, and gravelly loams. The subsoils are of a light clay. Depth or surface soils vary. Permeability is fair to good. This class includes some gentle rolling terrain.

CLASS III: Made up of Class I and II soil types that are subject to periodic inundation. (Such conditions as flooding would tend to make septic tank installations in subdivisions unwise.)

CLASS IV: Fair Percolation. These soil types are light and medium textured clay loam, silty loams, gravelly clay loams and shallow phases of Class I and II soil types over basin clays. Depth of soil varies with some shallow deposits of permeable soils over basin clays. Subsoils are light to medium clays. Permeability is fair to poor. There is a great variation in the adaptability of the soil for the disposal of septic tank effluent. This area sometimes calls for more than the minimum requirements in the installation of septic tanks and their leaching lines.

CLASS V-a: Poor percolation characteristics. The soil types are heavy clays, silty clays, and upland soils with some of the more permeable soils in a shallow phase over basin clays. Subsoils are medium or heavy clays, hard—pan or other impervious material.  Depth of soil varies and there are some slopes over 
three percent. These soils generally have restricted drainage with a permeability rating of poor to very poor. One can expect to find high ground water conditions in this class, as well as periodic flood- ing. If satisfactory for use of septic tanks these soil types will require special means of establishing disposal fields. Foundation conditions are generally a problem in this class.

CLASS V-b: No permeability as these soil types are found in tidal flats or swamp areas. Soil types are heavy textured muck, peat, or tidal marsh. Since the soils are waterlogged, they present impossible foundation conditions and are not adaptable for the disposal of effluent from septic tanks. Subdivision should not take place in these areas.

CLASS V-c: Tidal flats. No permeability. Salt water infiltration by test has been found to range from zero to 100 feet in depth of penetration into the soil. Most of this infiltration has occurred in areas subject to tidal flooding -- areas which are increasingly due to land subsidence. In 1940 quite a high percentage of salt water had infiltrated into the underground water reservoir. The source of this infiltration was found to be seepage of saline water from tidal percolation into uncapped wells.  Saline water seeping into the uncapped wells then was able to bypass the impervious blue clays into the underground reservoir.
Original from
UNWERSITY OF MICHIGAN

 L‘xk‘JU:;|k'

m_moomﬁauwwmsnmmwuum\m._o.um:b_fm;.>>>>>>\\HﬁE \ umNz_m_u.m_mooO .c_mEoQ 23:;
mm?mﬂwoﬂomm.%ERNoN:mc.m_E2._u£>BE \ ._._>_o oam Hm.wo.mSN co tﬁ_m_m>_c3 E8939 Lw_nEm_._ >>m€c< commCou_ 539960

The Climate and the Air: The climate of the valley is generally mild and is characterized by dry summers with moderate to high daytime temperatures and cool nights, and wet winters with moderate temperatures.  Temperatures have ranged from 20°F to lO6°F in San Jose.  The monthly averages for the period from 1906 to 1952 ranged from 49.3°F in January to 67.2° in July. Over 80 percent of the annual rainfall -- about 14 inches in San Jose -- occurs between November and March. The growing season in San Jose averages about 305 days.

Taylor, the world traveler of the 1850's, described the Santa Clara Valley as, "one of the most favored spots in the world, in point of fertility, salubrity of climate and natural beauty....there will be no more desirable place of residence anywhere on the Pacific Coast." He further described its air as being, "wonderfully clear and fragrant with the balsamic smell of the wild California herb....the ”yerba santa" of the Spaniards." Consequently, we are concerned with the ever-increasing pollution of the air of the valley by the industry, incinerators and automobiles of the Bay Area. 

The Water: Supply and Control: As previously noted, artesian water was first tapped in 1854, the
water freely gushing 4 or 5 feet into the air. By 1900, over 2000 wells were drawing water; and as of 1957, there are 4,000 throughout the county. The water supply which early settlers believed to be unlimited is now inadequate and thought must be given to both the importation of water and increased conservation of surface run-off water. At the same time, consideration must be given to methods of controlling flood waters that course the valley with increasing severity.  

Water Supply: Most of the ground water of the valley is contained in sediments of poorly sorted gravel, sand and clay. These sediments, deposited in channels of ancient streams, in general, underlie a good part of the Valley area and vary in depth between 1000 and 4000 feet. Older non-water bearing rocks and the alluvial gravels which overlay it gently dip from the sides of the valley towards the center. Surface waters infiltrate into the underground reservoir at the sides of the valley where the alluvial gravels are near the surface of the ground in the upper portions of the valley.

As the artesian wells ceased to flow and the numbers of pumping plants increased, the average depth
to water in the valley increased, reaching a critical 165 feet in 1950. Recognizing that the underground water supply depended upon the conservation of the winter run-off, orchardists in 1913 began to give consideration to methods of storing and percolating the waters from the winter rains.  

The first exhaustive technical study of the problem was accomplished by Tibbetts and Kieffer, San Francisco engineers, in 1921. Their conclusion was that only about 38% of the winter's precipitation was percolated into the underground gravels. The problem of the valley became that of saving some of the remaining 62%.

Efforts to form a water conservation district were begun in 1921. After two rejections by the voters, the present Santa Clara Valley Water Conservation District was approved in November of 1929.

The first bond issue of $2,000,000 was approved in 1934 and the first six dams of the district finished by 1936. Since 1950, two more dams and additional canals have been completed. Equally as important as the dams which catch the water run-off are the percolation beds into which the stored water is released so that it can sink down into the subsurface aquifers. These beds occur where the porous gravel deposits touch the surface.
ll III I I [ IL

The water conservation district's operations have been very successful as judged by the rise in ground water levels after the winter run-off has been released to the percolation beds. During the period of 1935 to 1944 when population and industrial growth were considered somewhat normal, there was a net gain in underground water levels.  Since 1944, the demand of the enlarged industrial community for water has exceeded the run-off water that has been available for percolation during a series of dry years.

The State of California, Department of Water Resources, has estimated that the Santa Clara Valley will ultimately require 184,000 acre feet of water annually. Possible sources of water to take care of the present overdraft are additional surface-water conservation facilities, the importation of water into the valley and the reclamation of waste water.

In order to attempt to supply some of its own needs, the City of San Jose, in January 1948, filed with the State Water Rights Board, an application for the appropriation of 100,000 acre feet annually of unappropriated water from the American River. As indicated on Plate Nos. 28 and 29, the water would be theoretically diverted from American
River at Folsom Dam, allowed to flow down the Sacramento River into Italian Slough and then be pumped through a conduit over the Diablo Range, and finally into the Evergreen Reservoir, a few miles southeast of San Jose.  The water would then be brought to the City limits by a short conduit.

Of immediate interest are the tentative plans of the State Water Resources Board to ask the Legislature for funds with which to start the South Bay Aqueduct.

This proposed 108 mile waterway will follow a route from the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta through the Livermore Hills and down the east side of Santa Clara Valley to a terminus near Hollister. To cost about $57,000,000 the aqueduct will possibly be ready in 1962 to bring about 120,000 acre feet of water into the valley yearly.

Other sources of water possibly available for importation have been considered. Among them have been the Hetch-Hetchy System, water from the Delta—Mendota canal by means of a tunnel through Pacheco Pass, water from the west side of the Santa Cruz Mountains by means of a tunnel, and the San Luis project.

A third possible source of water is the reclamation of the effluent from sewage disposal plants. This
